# Chapter 1: Integrated Marketing Commmunications
* As the opening vignette illustrates, companies use advertising, websites, direct marketing, sales, promotion, public relations, and social media to communicat something about their products, prices, or availability. In fact, finding the right combination of marketing communication tools is a critical decision for small and large firms, private and public organizations, and those that market goods, services, or ideas. In response, many companies use integrated marketing communications to link or connect their promotional tools and communicate with their current and prospective customers. Companies develop their marketing communication plans such that each promotional tool retains its unique communication effect and that the combination of promotional tools contributes to the overall communication effect of the brand or organization.
* This opening chapter sets the direction for the entire book as it highlights the marketing context for advertising and promotion. First, it describes the importance of marketing communication. It then briefly defines the different promotional or marketing communication tools available for marketers. Next, it illustrates the idea of integrated marketing communications and indicates why it is so important. Finally, it explains the content of an integrated marketing communication (IMC) plan as a way of orienting the perspective and organization of this text.

## Marketing Communication
* In this opening section we describe the importance of marketing communication within an organization's overall marketing effort. We begin by reviewing the definition of marketing to understand the importance of marketing communication to deliver value to consumers. We then explore examples of the content of marketing communication plans to illustrate their many different purposes.

### Marketing
* Historically, the American Marketing Association (AMA), the organization that represents marketing professionals in the United States and Canada, defined marketing as **the process of planning and executing the conception, pricing, promotion, and distribution of ideas, goods, and services to create exchanges that satisfy individual and organizational objectives.** This definition focused on exchange as a central concept in marketing and the use of key marketing activities to create and sustain relationships with customers. **For exchange to occur there must be two or more parties with something of value to one another, a desire and ability to give up that something to the other party, and a way to communicate with each other. Marketing communication plays an important role in the exchange process by informing consumers of an organization's product and convinging them of its ability to satisfy their needs or wants. 
* The marketing function in an organization facilitates the exchange process by examining the needs and wants of consumers, developing a product or service that satisfy these needs, offering it at a certain price, making it available at a particular place or through a channel of distribution, and developing a program of promotion or marketing communication. These four P--product, price, place (distribution), and promotion (marketing communication)--are elements of the **marketing mix**. The main purpose of the marketing function is to combine these four elements into a marketing program that facilitates the potential for exchange with consumers in the marketplace. The remainder of this section describes how the marketing mix decisions of product, price, and distribution (Figure 1-1) are often the primary content of marketing communication messages.

        Product Decision: Product Type, Features and Attributes/Benefits, Corporate Name/Identification, Brand name, Identification, Package Design

        Price Decision: Price Level, Price Policy, Discount, Allowance, Flexibility

        Distribution Decision: Channel Type, Channel Policy, Type of Intermeediary or Reseller, Type of Location/Store, Service Level

### Communication Product
* Each of the product facets listed in Figure 1-1 can be the focus of marketing communication. This section shows **how marketing messages can communicate the value of the product type, the importance of salient attributes or benefits, and the identity of the brand or organization, in order to assist with brand equity development.**

* **Product Value** An organization exists because it offers a product to consumers, generally in exchange for money. This offering may come in the form of a physical good (such as a soft drink, pair of jeans, or car), a service (banking, air travel, or legal assistance), a cause (United Way, March of Dimes), and idea (don't think and drive), or even a person (political candidate). **The product is anything that can be marketed and that, when consumed or supported, gives satisfaction to the individual.** And these different product types are not always independent. When eating at a restaurant, consuemrs enjoy the food itself but also value the service of not having to prepare the meal, or the opportunity to eat food they may not have the culinary skill to make. Thus, whatever the product type, marketing communication attempts to show how consuemrs can receive value through the product offering.

* **Product Attributes/Benefits** Every product has fairly obvious features or attributes that characterize what it is. A chocolate bar can have varying types of chocolate (e.g., milk, dark) and different kinds of ingredients (e.g., nuts, wafers). Thus, marketing commmunication can take the simple role of identifying the ingredients or composition of a good. For example, ads for Rice krispies cereal reminded consumers that each "krisp contained a single grain of rice, while ads for Shreddies cereal highlighted its unique diamond shape. Notice how the ESQ ad in Exhibit 1-2 highlighted attributes of the watch regarding the watch face and functions. Moreover, organizations often use marketing commmunication to educate consumers on how the services are delivered. For instance, WestJet ads demonstrate the personal attentiveness the airline's staff provide to customers, while Keg Steakhouse ads focus on the ambiance of the restaurant as well as the food.
* Consumers typically view a product as a bundle of benefits signifying what the attributes can do. Benefits can be functional (the performance of the product), experimental (what it feels like to use the product), and/or psychological (self-esteem or status that result from owning a particular brand). Advertising and other marketing communication tools draw attention toward these benfits. Managers often have to decide which benefits to emphasize or how to portray the benefits in a message, and the best way to deliver that message. BMW's latest advertising emphasizes t he joy of driving a BMW vehicle (i.e., experiential benefit) by showing an "expression of joy". One print ad did not show th product, but rather depcited the car's tire marks in colour as if they were painted unpon canvas.
* *Product symbolism* refers to what a product or brand means to consumers and what they experience in purchasing and using it. For products with strong symbolic features, the social meaning of the experiential or psychological benefits may be more important that function utility. For example, designer clothing such as Versace, Gucci, and Prada is often purchased on the basis of its symbolic meaning. Marketing communication plays an important role in developing and maintaining the symoblism of these brands.
* **Brand Identity** A brand or corporate name and its identification through its logo, symbol, or trademark represent critical product decisions. Marketers use brand names that can communicate product concepts clearly, such as Air Canada and Seadoo (water craft). The importance of selecting an appropriate visual representation of the brand is clear by noticing the symbol of any automobile brand or company. **One primary purpose of marketing communication is to present the brand and its identification in favourable locations, situations, or time frames that allow consumers to think or feel more positively toward the brand. The identification of a logo in an ad is critical, as evidenced by a legal challenge Molson-Coors filed against Labatt in which the company suggested the stylized mountaintop shown in a Kokanee ad appeared too similar to the logo used by Coors Light.
* Brand identification and the symbolism of teh brand are often reinforced by the tagline or slogan appearing in any form of marketing communication. IKEA's latest slogan encapsulates the essence of the brand magnificently with "Any space can be beautiful". Some executives suggest that the tagline is still very relevant since it "communicates a brand position or brand benefit". For example, Swiss Chalet returned to a previously successful tagline, "Always so good for so little", after making many changes the past few years. Harvey's has reminded us often over the years of the beauty of its hamburgers. Firms that offer many types of goods and services use an audio logo as one way of connecting brand messages across multiple media and IMC tools, much like a visual logo. For example, the Rogers audio logo can be heard for many of its services, including wireless and cable. Continuity and consistency in the promotional message across IMC tools--television, radio, wireless, interactive displays, Internet, podcasts--makes simple reminders of brand identification a key part of the brand experience.
* Packaging provides functional benefits such as economy, protection, and storage, which can be the main purpose of a marketing communication message. However, since the package is associated so closely with the brand by giving it a distinctive look, its symbolism and identity foten become the focal point of a marketing communication message. For example, the main point of an ad can be to show the packaging of the product, since this influences consumer choice as in the case of perfume. Other characteristics of packaging, like it being fully biodegradable, are a concern for marketers and have become the focal message for marekting communication.
* **Brand Equity** Finally, the culmination of marketing communication messages of product value, product attributes/benefits, and brand identification assists in creating and maintaingin brand equity. **Brand equity** is an intangible asset of added value or goodwill that results from the favourable image, impressions of differentiation, and/or strength of consumer attachment to a company name, brand name, or trademark. **Brand equity allows a brand to earn greater sales volume and/or higher margins than it could without the name, providing the comapny with a competitive advantage.** Conceptually, IMC planning and resulting decisiosn are expected to strongly generate brand equity. Figure 102 highlights the top 10 most valuable Canadian brands as determined by Brand Finance, while Figure 1-3 identifies the best Canadian brands as complied by Interbrand. From a related point of view, Ipsos Reid undertook research to uncover the most influential brand in Canada. President Choice attained the highest rand at number three with consumers saying the brand is relevant (38%), dependable (53%), and likeable in social media (24%).

        Figure 1-2: The Top 10 most valuable Canadian brands
        1: RBC
        2. TD
        3. Scotiabank
        4. BMO
        5. Bell
        6. Eribridge
        7. CIBC
        8. Bombardier
        9. Roger
        10. BlackBerry

        Figure 1-3: Best Canadian Brands
        1. TD
        2. Thomson Reuters
        3. RBC Financial Group
        4. Blackberry
        5. Scotiabank
        6. Tim Hortons
        7. Lululemon
        8. Shoppers Drug Mart
        9. Bell
        10. Rogers

### COMMUNICATION PRICE
* The price refers to what the consumer msut give up to purchase a product. Price is usually expressed in dollar amount exchanged for an item; however, **the true cost of a product to the consumer include time, mental activity, and behavioural effort. Price planning involves decisions concerning the level, policy, adjustments through discounts or allowances, and flexibility when facing competition. Moreover, it also signals the economic cost to consumers for all product benefits conmbined. Communicating price information is so critical that the federal government regulated airlines to advertise their full price that would include all fees and taxes.
* **Marketing communication plays a role in reinforcing a consumer's belief that the product's benfit or quality accurately reflects the price. One historical study regarding price, product quality, and advertising expenditures concluded that pricing and advertising strategies go together. High relative ad expenditures should accompany premium prices, and low relative ad expenditures should be tailored to low prices.
* Price is often a key message conveyed. For example, car dealership focus on price and discounts and allowances offered in many aspects of their marketing communication. **Internet ads focus on price or offers that attempt to influence consumer price beliefs. The information on websites offering deals is predominantly price related (e.g., redtag.ca). A main purpose of the price comparison adveritsing plays a key role in consumers' reference price for products when determining the value of a product. Other research finds that communicating price information is critical for influencing cconsumers who are in the process of deciding to buy a product.

### COMMUNICATING DISTRIBUTION
* Marketing channels, the "place" element of the marketing mix, are "sets of interdependent organizations involved in the process of making a product or service available for use or consumption". Most consumer product companies distribute through **indirect channels**, usually using a network of wholesalers and/or retailers. A company can choose not to use any channel intermediaries and sell to its customers through **direct channels** such as the Internet.
* In either case, marketing communication often provides information as to where a product can be purchased. For example, since most sporting goods comapnies have different quality and price levels, they might be inclined to communicat which brands and models are at different types of retailers. Alternatively, different kinds or levels of service might be available in various locations of the distrbituion network and this could be the focus of marketing communication. For instanc,e particular locations for cosmetics products offer customized beautifying services, while others can be close to self-serve. Extensive marketing communication occurs in order to direct consumers to organizational websites for online purchases.

## The Promotional Mix
* **Promotion** is the coordination of all seller-initiated efforts to set up channels of information and persuasion to sell goods and services or promote the idea. While implicit communication occurs throught the other elements of the marketing mix, most of an organization's communication with the marketplace occurs as part of a carefully planned and controlled promotional program. The tools an organization uses in a promotional program are referred to as the **prmotional mix**. While either term is suitable, promotion or marketing communication, many marketers use the latter since the tools are often connected. For example, a television commercial can direct vieweres to a website. Or a brand may use the same type of message in its radio and print ads. We now define of each of the tools and summarize their purpose.

### ADVERTISING
* **Advertising** is defined as any paid form of nonpersonal communication about an organization, product, service, or idea by an identified sponsor. The paid aspect of this definition reflects the fact that the space or time for an advertising message generally must be bought. An occsaional exception to this is the public service announcement (PSA), whose advertising space or time is donated by the media.
* The *nonpersonal* component means advertising involves mass media (e.g., TV, radio, magazines, newspapers) that can transmit a message to large groups of individuals, often at the same time. The nonpersonal nature of advertising means there is generally no opportunity for immediate feedback from the message recipent (except in direct-response advertising). Therefore, before the message is sent, the advertiser must consider how the audience will interpret and respond to it.
* Canadian advertisers spend more than $14 billion annually to reach their audiences, and there are several reasons why advertising is such an important part of many marketers' prmotional mix.

**The Promotional Mix: Advertising, Direct marketing, Internet Marketing, Sales promotion, Public relation, Personal Selling**

* **Cost-Efficient** Advertising can be a very cost-efficient method for communicating with alrge audiences. For example, during a television season, prime-time network television reached 85 eprcent of Canadian on a daily basis. The most-watched TV show each week attracts an audience of about 3 million English-speaking viewers. The average top-10 show audience is about 2.4 million viewers, while the average audience for the top 11 to 20 shows is about 1.7 million viewers. One study quotes media experts who estimate the cost per thousand reached at $25 for a top show and $20 for a top 11-20 show. To reach an audience for Canadian-produced television shows cost $16 per thousand; specialty channel audiences cost $8 per thousand.
* **Cost-Effective** Assuming that a majority of the viewers actually watched a TV ad, paid attention during the airing, and remember something about the message, then advertising can be seen as a very cost-effective form of marketing communication for many brands. In general, advertising can be cost-effective method for allowing potential customers to know something about a brand and have a positive attitude toward the brand prior to, during, or after purchasing a product.
* **Brand Effects** Advertising is also a valuable tool for building company or brand equity as it is a powerful way to provide consumers with information as well as to influence their attitudes. **Advertising can be used to create favourable and unique images and association for a brand, which can be very important for companies selling products or services that are difficult to differentiate on the basis of functional attributes. Brand image and brand reputation play an important role in the purchase of many goods and services, and advertising remains a recommended approach to build a brand.
* **Brand Interaction** Increasingly, advertising in media such as television, print, and outdoor is employed to encourage consuemrs to interact with the brand online. For example, a Boil King campaign created the fictitious journalist Rob Liking, who interviewed people grilling on their barbeques. Executives identified research showing that consumers researched their purchase online prior to a store visit, thus leading to a primary objective of influencing consumers' behaviour in teh form of visiting the company's website.
* **Flexible Tool** Advertising is a flexible tool that can be used for many industries (e.g., cars or soft drinks), market situations (e.g., new product launch or market development for established product), channel members (e.g., consumers or retailers), and target audiences (e.g., new customers or loyal customers). For example, the new campaign for American Express tries to attract customers of other credit cards with its message, "Impossible? Nah. Does that sound like the service you get from your card?"
* **Multiple Domain** Different types of advertising occur in many domains. Canadian marketers of goods and services advertising to consumer markets with national or regional brand messages, and in some cases with messages to particular international consuemr markets. Alternatively, local retailers and other goods and services providers use advertising for many communication purposes in order to achieve sales objectives. Also, industry associations, like the Dairy Farmers of Canada, advertise extensively to consumer markets as do all levels of government and non-governmental organizations like Canadian Blood Services. Shoppers Drug Mart used advertising to celebrate its fiftieth anniversary with its largest media buy ever to support all of its marketing communication.
* Business-to-business advertising is directed to those who buy or influence the purchase of goods or services for their organization. Exhibit 1-7 shows an example of how General Electric communicates to other organizations that it competes in the solar energy market. Professional advertising directed to those with specific designations is found in many industries such as health, management, government, and technology. Finally, advertising directed to channel members like wholesaleers, distributors, and retailers is found in all industry sectors around the world.

### SALES PROMOTION
* **Sales promotion** is defined as marketing activities that provide extra value or incentives to the sales force, distributors, or the ultimate consumer and can influence their behaviour to stimulate sales. Sales promotion is generally broken into two major categories: consumer-oriented and trade-oriented activities.
* Consumer sales promotion is targeted to the ultimate user of a product or service and includes tools like coupons, samples, premiums, rebates, contests, events, and point-of-purchase materials. These promotional tools encourage consumers to make an immediate purchase, participate in a brand activity by attending the Red Bull Crashed Ice competition in Quebec City, or be more involved with the organization's marketing communication by uploading a video to a social media site celebrating one's consumption of a brand. Exhibit 1-8 is an example of a coupon offer within an ad that encourage parents to switch to a healthier snack for their children. Shoppers Drug Mart celebrates its anniversary with a contest offering 50 grand prices and attracted more than 900,000 entrants.
* Trade sales promotion is targeted toward marketing intermediaries such as wholesalers, distributors, and retailers. Promotional and merchandising allowances, price deals, sales contests, and trade shows are examples of teh promotional tools used to encourage the trade to stock and promote  a company's products. Some trade promotions benefit consumers since they receive information contained in display or receive discounted prices that are passed along to them from the retailer. Retail personnel at Shoppers Drug Mart liked the specialized point-of-purchase material so much they avoided dismantling it even after the party was over.

### PUBLIC RELATIONS
* Public relations (PR) occurs when an organization systematically plans and distribute information in an attempt to control and manage its image. **Public relations** is defined as "the management function which evaluates public attitudes, identifies the policies and procedures of an individual or organization with the public interest, and executes a program of action **to earn public understanding and acceptance**. Public relations uses a variety of tools--including special publications, participation in community activities, fundraising, sponsorship of special events, and public affair activities--to enhance an organization's image. **Many organizations make PR an integral part of their predetermined marketing and promotional strategies.** Exhibit 1-9 shows how sponsorship activities are part of a PR strategy. PR is now recognized as a communications tool that uses and supports adveritsing and sales promotion. For example, Cisco and the CBC, two key drivers of teh "One Million Acts of Green" program, recruited Time Hortons to their cause through the promotion of a 10-cent discount for each hot drink purchased and consumed with a reusable travel mug. Shoppers Drug Mart sponsored the Toronto Internation Film Festival and featured its imagery with the red carpet entry of the celebrities.
* **Publicity** refers to nonpersonal communications regarding an organization, product, service, or idea not directly paid for or run under identified sponsorship. The message reaches the public in the form of a news story, editoral or announcement. Like advertising, publicity invoels nonpersonal communication to a mass audience, but unlike advertising, publicity is not directly paid for by the organization. The organization encourages the media to cover or run a favourable story by using tools like news releases, press conferences, feature articles, and audio-visual media.
* An advantage of publicity over other forms of promotion is its credibility. Consumers generally tend to be less skeptical toward favourable information about a product or service example, the succes (or failure) of a new movie is often determine by the reviews it receives from film critics, who are viewed by many moviegoers as objective avaluators. Another advantage of publicity is its low cost, since the company is not paying for time or space in a mass medium. While an organization may incur costs in developing publicity items or maintaining a staff to do so, these expenses will be far less  than those for the other promotional programs.

### DIRECT MARKETING
* **Direct marketing** occurs when organizations communicate directly with target audiences to generate a response and/or a transaction. Direct marketing includes telemarketing and call centres, direct mail, mail-order catagues, and direct-response ads in broadcast and print media. Traditionallhy, direct marketing has not been considered a part of the promotional mix since it had distinct objectives, strategies, and tactics. However, we view direct marketing as an important component of a firm's marketing communication program since it is connected to many other communication tools. Extensive direct marekting activies also occur iwth the administration of loyalty programs designed to keep in touch with frequent purchase customers. Shoppers Drug Mart revamped its Optimum points program while celebrating its fiftieth anniversary, which translated into 20 percent growth in its membership.
* Direct-marketing tools are used by companies that distribute their products to consumers directly and by companies that distribute their products through traditional distribution channels  or their own sales force. In order to communicate directly, companies develop and maintain database containing contact information (e.g., address, phone number, email) of present and prospective customers. They use telemarketing to call customers directly and attempt to sell products and services or qualify them as sales leads. Call centres are used to respond to customer inquiries or concerns. Marketers also sent out direct-mail pieces ranging from simple letters and flyers to detailed brochures, catalogues, and DVDs to give potential customers information about their products or services. Direct-marketing techniques are also used to distribute product samples and other promotional items. In addition, marketers use **direct-response advertising**, wherebhy a product is promoted through an ad (e.g., television or print) that encourages the consumer to purchase directly from the manufacturer.

### INTERNET MARKETING
* We are currently experiencing a dynamic change in marketing through interactive media, delivered via the Internet. **Interactive media allow for a back-and-forth flow of information whereby users can participate in and modify the form and content of the information they receive instantly. Unlike traditional forms of marketing communication such as advertising, which are one-way in nature, these new media allow users to perform a variety of functions such as receiving and altering information and images, making inquiries, responding to questions, and, of course, making purchases. Shoppers Drug Mart attracted many new fans in social media and further developed its online luxury boutique Murale.
* Many website provide current and potential customers with informatio nabout the company's activities and products. Other firms develop websites to entertain or communicate more emotionally with their clientele. In fact, as part of a complete IMC program that included advertising, sales promotion, events, and public relations. BMW's Smart Car used Internet media with a dedicated microsite, a customized Facebook page, and Youtube to demonstrate the car's big interior despite it being small on the outside.
* As this example illustrate, the Internet is a medium that can be used t oexecute all the elements of the promotional mix. Inaddition to advertising on the Web, marketers offer sales promotion incentives such as coupons, contests, and sweepstakes online, and they use the Internet to conduct direct marketing, personal selling, and public relations activies more effectively and efficiently. For example, Exhibit 1-11 shows how consumers can interact with the naked juice brand on the Internet.
* Social media avenues like Facebook and Youtube are ways for marketers to reach consumers with print and video  ads, respectivel. Each also allows brand to establish groups (Facebook) or channels (Youtube) for all kinds of marketing commmunication activities such as simple ads and sophisticated sales promotions. With imagination and creativity, all aspects of marketing communication are adapted in these new opportunities. Moreover, the interactive features of new media allow for extended commmunication among members, thereby providing a powerful means of additional communication.
* Access to websites, social media, and other interactive experiences and their resulting marketing communication sponsorship (i.e., ads) has been made easier and more prevalent with the development of wireless mobile media devices. In essence, these smart portable devcies and their accompanying applications are opening the door for marketers to adapt and invent ways of implementing marketing communication. For example, while walking down the street a person could receive a message with an incentive to turn back and eat at a restaurant he jstu passed by.

### PERSONAL SELLING
* The final promotional mix element is **personal selling**,  aform of persona-to-person communication in which a seller assist and/or persuades prospective buyers to purchase the company's product or service or to act on an idea. Personal selling involves direct contact between buyer and seller, either face-to-face or through telecommunications. This interaction gives the marketer communication flexibility; the seller can see or hear the potential buyer's reactions and tailor the message to their specific needs or situation. We do not cover personal selling in this book as many decisions pertaining to this topic are the responsibiltiy of a sales manager.

### PARTICIPANTS IN THE PROMOTIONAL PROCESS
* Thus far we have identified the major promotional tools that marketers use. To understand the context in which promotional decisions are made, we identify the participants of the promotional process (Figure 1-5). Overall, there are five major groups: advertisers, advertising agencies, media organizations, specialized marketing communication services, and collateral services. Each group has specific roles in the promotional process.

                Figure 1-5: participants in the promotional process
                Advertiser (client)
                Advertising agency
                Media organization
                Specialized marketing, communication Service (Direct-response services, sales promotion agencies, interactive agencies, public relations firms, media buying agencies)
                Collateral services

* **Advertisers** have the products, services, or causes to be marketed, and they provide the funds that pay for advertising and promotions. Advertisers assume major responsibility for developing the marketing program and making the final decision regarding the advertising and promotional program. An organization may perform most of these efforts itself, either through its own advertising department or by setting up an in-house agency.
* **Advertising agencies** are outside firms that specialize in the creation, production, and/or placement of promotional messages. An agency may also provide other services like research to facilitate the promotional process. Advertisers are referred to as **clients** if they retain the services of advertising agencies. many large advertisers retain the services of a number of agencies, particularly when they have multiple products. Often, an ad agency will act as a partner with an advertiser and assume more responsibility for developing the marketing and promotional programs.
* **Media organizations** provide information or entertainment to their subscribers, vieweres, or readers. From the perspective of the promotional planner, media provides an environment for the firm to deliver its marketing communication message. The media must have editorial or program content that attracts consumers so advertisers and their agencies will want to buy time or space with them. **While the media perform many other functions that help advertisers understand their markets and their customers, a medium's primary objective is to sell itself as a way for companies to effectively reach their target audiences with their messages (Exhibit 1--12). Media companies in Canada have grown significantly over the past decade through acquisition of different formats, thus allowing considerable integration options for advertisers. For example, Rogers offers customers virtually all media opportunities and its staff has a strong integration orientation when selling packages to its clients.

                Exhibit 1-12: National Geographic promotes its value to advertisers
                What is so cool about National Geographic? It's checking out National Geographic Interactive magazine editions on your new Ipad. It's going to the redesigned NationalGeographic.com and finding an awe-inspiring photo from the other side of the world. it's tuning in to the new Nat Geo Wild Channel to see Casey Anderson and meet his best friend, Brutus, an 800-pound grizzly bear. It's joining a conversation with one million other people on National Geographic's Facebook page. It's getting a Nat Geo tweet while you're out with friends. It's checking in on Gowalla to complete a National Geographic trip. It's all the different ways you can interact with the best content in the world through award-winning magazines, websites and TV networks, books, films and DVDs, games and apps, photos and maps expeditions and events.

* **Specialized marketing communication services** include direct marketing agencies, sales promotion agencies, interactive agencies, public relations firms, and media buying agencies. These organizations provide services in their areas or expertise. A direct-response agency develops and implements direct-marketing programs, while sales promotion agencies develop contests and sweepstakes, premium offers, or sampling programs. Interactive agencies develop websites, social media activities, or other types of Internet ads. Public relations firms generate and manage publicity and its products and services as well as to focus on its relationship with its relevant publics. Media buying agencies work with clients and the media organizations for optimal placement of advertiser's messages.
* **Collateral services** include **marketing research companies, package design firms, consultants, photographers, printers, video production houses, and event marketing services.** These individuals and comapnies perform specialized functions the other participants (advertisers, agencies, media organizations, and specialized marketing communication services) use in planning and executing the IMC plan.

## Intergrated Marketing Communications
* Most large companies understand that the wide range of promotional tools must be coordinated to communicate effectively and present a consistent image to target audiences. In turn, even smaller-scall marketers have followed suit and are moving to a more comprehensive perspective of marketing communication. We now illustrate the topic of integrated marketing communications by distinguishing its evolution, renewed perspective, and importance.

### THE EVOLUTION OF IMC
* During the 1980s, many companies moved toward **integrated marketing communication (IMC)** as the need for strategic planning and integration of their promotional tools intensified. Marketers subsequently asked their agencies to coordinate the use of more promotional tools rather than reply primarily on media advertising. Comapnies also looked beyong traditional advertising agencies and employed other promotional specialists to develop and implement other components withiin the promotional plans. At this point in time, a task force from the American Association of Advertising Agencies defined integrated marketing communications as:

                a concept of marketing communications planning that recognizes the added value of a comprehensive plan that evaluates the strategic roles of a variety of communication disciplines--for example, general advertising, direct response, sales promotion, and public relations--and combines these disciplines to provide clarity, consistency, and maximum communicaitons impact.

* In the 1990s, companies saw IMC as a way to coordinate and manage their marketing communication programs to ensure customers received a consistent message. IMC represented an improvement over the traditional method of treating the promotional tools as virtually separate activities as all agencies contributed to the IMC planning for their clients. IMC became one of the "new-generation" marketing approaches used by companies to better focus their efforts in acquiring, retaining, and developing relationships with customers and other stakeholders. **With this change, IMC faced criticism that it primarily relied on the tactical coordination of communication tols with the goal of making them look and sound alike.** Others criticized it as an "inside-out" marketing approach that simply bundled promotional mix elements together so they have one look and speak with one voice. As IMC evolved, both academics as well as practitioners suggested a renewed perspective that viewed the discipline from a strategic perspective, IMC Perspective 1-1 describes how successful marketers are making IMC decisions.

### A RENEWED PERSPECTIVE OF IMC
* A renewed understanding of IMC viewed it as a business process that identifies the most appropriate and effective methods for communicating and building relationships as shown in the following definition:

                Integrated marketing communication is a strategic business process used to plan, develop, execute and evaluate coordinated, measurable, persuasive brand communications programs over time with consumers, customers, prospects, employees, associates and other targeted relevant external and internal audiences. The goal is to generate both short-term financial returns and build long-term brand and shareholder value.

* IMC is now seen as an ongoing strategic business process rather than jsut tactical integration of communication activities. It also recognizes that there are a number of relevant audiences that require specific communication programs. Finally, this definition reflects the increasing emphasis placed on the demand for accountability and measurement of the outcomes of marketing communication programs as well as marketing in general. A renewed perspective suggests that IMC has four general characteristics:

**
1. Unified communication for consistent message and image.
2. Differentiated communication to multiple customer groups.
3. Database-centered communication for tangible results.
4. Relationships fostering communication with existing customers
**

* Many companies are realize that communicating effectively with customers and other stakehodlers involves more than jsut the tactical use of the traditional marketing communication tools. These firms, along with many advertising agencies, are embracing IMC and incorporating it into their marketing and business practices. In fact, it is hypothesized that IMC is now critically connected to a firm's market and brand orientation. Research reports higher use of IMC leading to higher levels of sales, market share, and profits. Academics and practitioners have questioned whether IMC is just another "management fashion" whose influence will be transitory. Critics of IMC argue that it merely reinvents and renames existing ideas and concepts and that it questions its significance for marketing and advertising thought and practice.
* Despite these concerns, one major marketing organizeion significantly moved toward IMC.  Procter & Gamble (P&G) overhauled its marketing and organizational operations, which had enormous implications for how P&G makes its promotional decisions with an IMC perspective. The change originate when managers decided to focus on when the consumer chooses to buy and use the product as the central driver for all decisions. Marketers in Canada work on multi-functional teams to customeize worldwide product launches for local success. This has resulted in P&G Canada typically using the original TV creative, but augmenting the campaign of agencies and employed multiple parties to execute new brand initiatives. Furthermore, P&G expected strategic communication planning from its agencies, which were immersed in their client's newfound customer-centric direction. Innovative communication practices resulted from these internal and external development. The Canadian campaign for Cover Girl Outlast Lipstick featured motion-sensitve ads in bars and restaurants in Toronto. Old Spice dance events, known as "Red Zone after hours" occurred at Canadian bars and included an online contest, out-of-home media, and a televised competition.
* While the debate over teh value and relevance of IMC is likely to continue, proponents of the conept far outnumber the critics as IMC is proving to be a permanent change that offers significant value to marketers. We will now discuss reasons regarding the importance of IMC.

### IMPORTANCE OF IMC
* A successful IMC program requries that a firm find the right combination of promotional tools, define their role and the extent to which they can or should be used, and coordinate their use. This perspective becomes important for the organization because of the many audience it communicates with, the vast number of messages consumers receive from many brands, the emergence of strong marketing relationships, consumer adoption of technology and media, and improved managerial planning.
* **Audience Contacts** Marketers use the promotional mix elements to communicate with current and/or prospective customers as well as other relevant audience such as employees, suppliers, community, and government. Companies take an audience contact perspective whereby they consider all the potential ways of reaching their target audience and presenting the message of the company or brand in a favourable manner. In terms of customers, for example, marketers identify how their loyal buyers interact with a company or brand. This contact can range from seeing or hearing an ad to actually using or experiencing a brand at a company-sponsored event. Moreover, this idea can be extended to non-customers and all other potential audiences the company or brand many choose to target its marketing communication.
* Figure 1-6 shows how target audiences can come into contact with a company or brand. Marketers must determine how valuable each contact tool is for communicating with their target audience and how they can be combined to form an effective IMC program. This is generally done by starting with the target audience and determining which IMC tools will be most effective in reaching, informing, and persuading them and ultimately influencing their behaviour. Nissan took a multiple audience approach with its advertising. To address  the problem of the brand languishing in the Quebec market, Nissan launched the "Gros Bon Sens" (Big Common Sense) campaign to counter the belief that Nissan sole more expeensive cars. This message fit well with the Quebec market since consumers purchase a higher percentage of small, less expensive cars. The Gros Bons Sens concept manifested with an approachable, every day kind of guy who represented the average consumer Nissan targeted. In the TV ads the character moved on to other aspects of buying and enjoying Nissan Sentra and Versa. In other parts of Canada, Nissan highlighted the enjoyment consumers experience with their vehicles with the message, "Best part of your day". Ads showed people struggling with day-to-day activies only to find their day brighten once they began to use or drive their Rogue, Versa, or Sentra. Consumers found comfort, convenience, and excitement depending upon the situation represented.
* **Consumer's Point of View** It is important for marketers to keep concepts distinct to communicate with collegues within the organization or other organizations when making decisions. For example, when planning a sales promotion, it is useful  to refer to it as a sales promotion so that everyone involved can discuss its merits appropriate and allocate the sales promotion expenditure within the correct budget. What is the right sales promotion (e.g., coupon versus bonus pack)? Is the incentive strong enough to encourage the target audience to switch to our brand? Consumers, on the other hand, receive many exposures from many different brands, each using many different promotional tools. In fact, consumers receive so many exposures  that they have the habit of often referring to any promotional tool as "advertising". Given this situation, the need for planning with an IMC perspective becomes imperative. All the elements of the promotional campaign have to be carefully linked so taht the message is clear and the brand is represented well as seen in this example.

                Figure 1-6: IMC audience contact tools
                Target audience <--> Broadcast media (TV/radio), Print media (newspaper, magazine), Public relation/publicity, Internet/interactive, Direct marketing, sales promotion, product placements (TV and movies), Events and sponsorship, Word-of-mouth, Point-of-purchase (displays, packaging), Personal selling, Out-of-home media

* The "Become a Dorito Guru" contest, promoted on TV, social media, MuchMusic, and Doritos packaging, invited Canadians to develop their own vision of the brand with the chance to receive a financial prize of $25,000 and 1 percent of sales, see the ad on national TV, and experience the thrill of having their ad disseminated throughout the digital worl. Doritos worked with a variety of marketing communication agencies including BBDO Toronto (creative), Capital C (packaging and point-of-purchase display), Proximity (digintal media), Fleishman-Hillard (public relations), and OMD Canada (media placement). Together, these experts conceived a concept where contestants would post their entry to DoritosGuru.ca, Facebook, or Youtube, allowing viewers to vote on the one they liked best to identify the five semi-finalists. The contest obtained 30,000 Facebook fans, 1.5 million visitors to the Youtube channel, 2,100 video submission (surpassing the number received in a similar campaign conducted in teh United States a year previously), and 589,000 votes. A judging panel selected as the winner a team headed by Ryan Coopersmith, which branded the new chip "Scream Cheese". The ad showed a number of people screaming while doing everyday activities (e.g., work, movie, dinnertime) and ended with "What are you screaming about" Coopersmith's team planned to use the winnings to finance their own feature film.
* **Relationship Marketing** Many marketers seek more than a one-time exchagne or transaction with customers and concentrate on developing and sustaining relationship with their customers. This has led to a new emphasis on **relationship marketing**, which involves creating, maintaining, and enhancing long-term relationships with individual customers as well as other stakeholders for mutual benefit. The banking industry has been very successful with building relatinships, the extensive personal and financial information banks have access to allows them to offer products and services in a timely manner as people's financial needs change. This is enhanced through services provided by financial advisers and wealth managers.
* This relationship focus is generally more profitable since it is often more cost-effective to retain cujstomers than to acquire new ones. Furthermore, these retained customers tend to buy more products or expand their purchases to other products that an organization offers. marketers are giving more strategic importance in their plans to the lifetime value of a customer because studies have shown that reducing customer defections by just 5 percent can increase future profit by as much as 30 to 90 percent. The AMA adopted a revised and more strategic definition of marketing, which is as follows:

                Marketing is an organizational function and a set of processes for creating, communicating and delivering value to customers and for managing customer relationships in ways that benefit the organization and its stakeholders.

* In order to facilitate the relationship, comapnies build database containing customer names; geographic, demographic, and psychographic profiles; purchase patterns; media preferences; credit ratings; and other characteristics. Marketers use this information to target consumers through a variety of IMC tools thereby enhancing the relationship. With so many tools, and since their customers are involved so closely with the firm, the need for consistency and coordination becomes even more critical.
* **Consumer Adoption of Technology and Media** the expanded use of integrated marketing communication is more critical due to consuemr adoption of technology and media. For example, technology has vastly expanded the number of channels available to viewers. As a result, audiences are more fragmented and television advertising reaches smaller and more selective audiences. This requires brands to ensure their messages are attended to in other media or other IMC tools. Thus, the more selective television ad might direct the viewer to seek out the brand's website for a coupon or sample, or to read about its charitable sponsorship activities. **TV ads also direct vieweres to the brand's social media like Facebook for similar reasons with thee goal of encouraging them to become "fans".**
* Online services provide information and entertainment as well as the opportunity to shop and order a vast array of products. Marketers are responding by developing websites where they can advertise their products and services interactively as well as transact sales. New applications for advertising on the Internet are invented each year, allowing marketers greater opportunity to reach particular audiences. For instance, brands have initiated "sponsored groups" on Facebook where consumers can join and receive brand messages and promotional offerings like contests and samples. Toyota created the FI Canada group and offered desktop wallpapers and ringtones for its 3,000 members. Other applications included targeted banner ads based on consumer profile variables like demographics, psychographics, and media consumption preferences. Telus experimented with a virtual-reality world that 120,000 of its 1.2 million customers experienced; word of the new venture spread through blogs and newspaper articles. With essentially no monetary investment in the venture, the media exposure Telus received helped convey it as a technologically advanced company. More importantly, Telus ultimately planned promotions to customers based on the behaviours exemplified in the simulated game.
* **Planning Efficiency and Effectiveness** A final reason for IMC importance is that marketers understand the value of strategically integrating the communication functions rather than having them operate autonomously. By coordinating their marketing communications efforts, companies can avoid duplication, take advantage of synergy among promotional tools, and develop more efficient and effective marketing communication programs. Advocates of IMC argue that it is one of the easiest ways for a company to maximize the return on its investment in marketing and promotion. Empirical research supports this contention as strong IMC performance leads to strong market performance. Exhibit 1-13 shows a marketing effort where planning is paramount. Much of Shoppers Drug Mart's success in their "Fabulous 50" campaign hinged on a dedicated 30-person cross-funcitonal team in charge of the IMC plan who ensured consistency across all audience contact points.

## Integrated Marketing Communication Planning
* In developing an IMC strategy, a company combines the promotional mix elements to produce an effective program for marketing communication. **IMC planning** involves the process of conceiving, executing, evaluating, and controlling the use of promotional mix elements to communicate effectively with target audiences. The marketer decide which promotional tools to use and how to combine them to achieve IMC objectives. Furthermore,  the marketer decides on the role and function of the specific elements of the promotional mix, develops strategies for each element, and implements the plan. The resulting **IMC plan** provides the framework for developing, implementing, and controlling the organization's IMC program. A model of the IMC planning process is shown in Figure 1-7. The remainder of this chapter explains the model and expresses the steps in developing a marketing communication program. IMC Perspective 1-2 shows these ideas in action with Maple Leaf Foods.

                Figure 1-7: An integrated marketing communications planning model

                Reivew the Marketing plan

                ->

                Assess the marketing communication situation

                ->

                Determine IMC plan objectives

                ->

                Develop IMC programs

                ->

                (
                Advertising<->Advertising objectives<->Advertising strategy<->Advertising message and media strategy and tactic
                
                Direct marketing<->Direct marketing objectives<->Direct marketing strategy<->Direct marketing message and media strategy and tactics

                Interactive/Internet marketing<->Interactive/Internet marketing objectives<->Interactive Internet marketing strategy<->Interactive/Internet message and media strategy and tactics

                Sales promotion<->Sales promotion objectives<->Sales promotion strategy<->Sales promotion message and media strategy and tactics

                PR/publicity<->PR/publicity objectives<->PR/publicity strategy<->Public relations message and media strategy and media strategy and tactics
                )

                ->

                Implement and control the IMC plan 

        
                Figure 1-7: An integrated marketing communications planning model

                * Review the Marketing Plan: 
                        Focus on market, comapny, consumer, competitive, and environmental information; examine marketing objectives, strategy, and programs; 
                        understand role of promotion within marketing plan
                * Asses the Marketing Communications Situation: 
                        Internal analysis 
                                Relative strengths and weaknesses of products/services; Previous promotional programs; 
                                brand image; 
                                promotional organization and capabilities, 
                        external analysis      
                                Customer behaviour analysis, 
                                competitive analysis, 
                                environmental analysis
                * Determine IMC Plan Objectives: 
                        Establish IMC communication objectives; 
                        establish IMMC behavioural objectives
                * Develop IMC Programs: 
                        For advertising, sales, promotion, public relations, direct marketing, and Internet marketing 
                                Set specific communication and behavioural objectives for each IMC tool; 
                                Determine budget requirements; 
                                Develop relevant message strategy and tactics; 
                                Select suitable media strategy and tactics; 
                        Investigate integration options acrss all five programs
                * Implement and Control the IMC Plan:
                        Design all promotional materials inernally or with agencies and buy media space/time
                        Measure promotional program results/effectiveness and make adjustments

### REVIEW THE MARKETING PLAN
* Before developing an IMC plan, promotional planners must understand where the company (or the brand) has been, its current position in the market, where it intends to go, and how it plans to get there. Most of this information should be contained in the **marketing plan**, a written document that describes the overall marketing strategy and programs developed for an organization, a particular product line, or a brand. Marketing plans can take several forms but generally include five basic parts:

                * A detailed situation analysis that consists of an internal marketing review and an external analysis of the market, company, consumer, competition, and macro-environment
                * Specific marketing objectives that provide direction, a time frame for marketing activities, and a mechanism for measuring performance
                * A marketing strategy and program that includes selection of target market(s) and decisions and plans for the four marketing mix elements.
                * A program for implementing the marketing strategy, including determining specific tasks to be performed and responsibilities
                * A process for monitoring and evaluating performance and providing feedback to permit proper control and allow for strategic or tactical revisions

* The promotional plan is developed similarly to the marketing plan and often uses its detailed information. However, some IMC strategy decisiosn require more comprehensive or specific information, or more detailed analysis and specific consideration of existing information, therefore requiring a situation analysis for marketing communication.

### ASSESS THE MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS SITUATION
* In the IMC program, the situation analysis focuses on relevant internal and external factors for developing a promotional stratey much like the marketing situation analysis.
* **Internal Analysis** The **internal analysis** assess four relevant areas: product, previous promotional programs, firms or brand image, and organizational capabilities (Figure 1-8).
* The internal analysis assess the relative strengths and limitations of the product; the product's unique selling points, attributes, or benefits; and its packaging, price, and design. This information is important to the creative personnel who must develop the brand's advertising message and ocmmunicate aspects of the brand.
* Since the firm is planning a new promotional plan, it is imperative that a review of previous promotional objectives, budgets, strategies, and tactics of all elements should occur to understand the strengths and limitations. Furthermore, if the firm has utilized marketing research to track the results of previous programs, the information needs to be examined  closely. This step helps determine what promotional decisiosn should be retained, revised, or withdrawn.
* The strengths and limitations of the firm or the brand from an image perspective will have a significant impact on the way it can advertise and promote itself as well as its products and services. Comapnies or brands that are new to the market or those for whom perceptions are negative may have to concentrate on their images. Firms with a strong image need to understand how to maintain their image.
* For example, Starbucks has an outstanding image that is a result of the quality of its coffee and other products as well as its reputation as a socially responsible company. The company is recognized as a good citizen in its dealings with commmunities, employees, suppliers, and the environment. Starbucks understands that being identified as a socially responsible company is an important part of its success, which guides the selection of its promotional decisions. For example, Starbucks publishes a Corporate Social Responsibility Annual Report each year that describes the commpany's social, environmental, and economic effects in the communities it serves.
* Reviewing the capabilities of the firm and its ability to develop and implement a successful promotional program, and the organization of the promotional department, the analysis may indicate the firm is not fully capable of planning and implementing the promotional program. If this is the case, it would be wise to look for assitance from an advertising agency or other promotional facilitator. If the organization is already using an ad agency, the focus wil lbe on the quality of the agency's work and the result achieved by past and/or current campaigns.



                Figure 1-8: Areas covered in the situation analysis

                Internal Factors:
                * Assessment of firm's promotinal capabilities
                        Organization of promotional department
                        Capability to develop and execute promotional programs
                        Role and function of all agencies
                * Assessment of firm's previous promotional programs
                        Promotional objectives
                        Promotional budgets and allocations
                        Promotional mix strategies and programs
                        Results of promotional programs
                * Assessment of firm or brand image
                        What are customers' attitudes toward our product/service?
                * Assessment product/service strengths and weaknesses
                        What are its key attributes and benefits
                        Does it have any unique selling points
                        Are the package and label consistent with the brand image?
                
                External Factors
                * Customer behaviour analysis:
                        Who buys our product or service?
                        Who makes the decision to buy the product?
                        Who influences the decision to buy the product?
                        How is the purchase decision made? Who assumes what role?
                        What does the customer buy? What needs must be satisfied?
                        Why do customers buy a particular brand?
                        Where do they go or look to buy the product or service?
                        When do they buy? Any seasonality factors?
                        What social, lifestyle, or demographic factors influence the purchase decision?
                * Competitive analysis
                        Who are our direct and indirect competitors?
                        What key benefits and positioning are used by our competitors?
                        What is our position relative to the competition?
                        How big are competitors' promotion budgets
                        What promotion strategies are competitors using?
                *Environmental analysis
                        What current trends or developments affect the promotional program?

#### External Analysis
* The **external analysis** focuses on factors such as characteristics of the firm's customers, market segments, competitors, and environment, as shown in Figure 1-8. A detailed consideration of customers' characteristics (e.g., demographics, psychographics) and buying patterns, their decision processes, and factors influencing their purchase decisions are all relevant for promotional planners to make effective decisions. Often, marketing studies are needed to answer these questions. A key element of the external analysis is an assessment of the market. The attractiveness of different market segments must be evaluated and the segments to target identified. Exhibit 1-15 shows ads from a campaign for Tourism Kelowna, where a good consumer understanding is important.
* The external phase of the promotional program situation analysis also includes an in-depth examination of both direct and indirect competitors. Focus in on the firm's primary competitors: their specific strengths and limitations; their segmentation, targeting, and positioning strategies; and the promotional strategies they employ. The size and allocation of their promotional budgets, their media strategies and the messages they are sending to the marketplace should all be considered.

### DETERMINE IMC PLAN OBJECTIVES
* An important part of this stage of the promotional planning process is establishing relevant and appropriate objectives. In this text, we stress the importance of distinguishing among different types of objectives that are generally decided during the planning of different strategies.
* **Marketing objectives** refer to what is to be accomplished by the overall marketing program. They are often stated in terms of sales, market share, or profitability and are determined when the marketing plan is constructed. **Precise definition of marketing objectives is important to give guidance on what is to be accomplished in the marketing communication plan. With the re-launch of Tourism BC, the government looked to increase tourism revenue by 5 percent over a five-year time period.**
* **Communication objectives** refers to what the firm seeks to accomplish with its IMC program. They are often stated in terms of the nature of the message to be communicated or what specific think about the process consumers will go through in responding to marketing communications. Tourism BC needed to improve its image as visits declined while  tourism gained in other provinces. **Behavioural objectives** in terms of trial purchase or repeat purchase, among others, may be defined along with the communication objectives. Tourism BC sought to increase the number of visitors from Ontario, presumably many for the first time, to achieve impressive revenue growth. Commmunication and behavioural objectives should be the guiding force for the IMC strategy and for each promotional tool.
* While determining these objectives, two questions are asked to tentatively set the budget: What will the promotional program cost? How will these monies be allocated? Ideally, the amount a firm spends on promotion should be determined by what must be accomplished to achieve communication and behavioural objectives. Tourism BC decided to spend $52 million for 2012 down from the $65 million it spent in 2009.

### DEVELOP IMC PROGRAMS
* As Figure 1-7 shows, each promotional mix element has its own set of objectives, overall strategy, message and media strategy and tactics, and a budget. For example, the advertising program will have its own set of objectives, usually involving the communication of a message or appeal to a target audience. A budget will be determined, providing the advertising manager and the agency with an idea of how much money is available for developing the ad campaign and purchasing media to disseminate the ad message.
* Two importan aspects of the advertising program are development of the message and the media strategy. Message development, often referred to as creative strategy, involves determining the basic message the advertiser wishes to convey to the target audience. This process, along with the ads that result, is to many students the most fascinating aspect of promotion. The Heart & Stroke ad shown in Exhibit 1-16 conveys an important message regarding the value of the Health Check logo.
* *Media strategy* involves determining which communication channels will be used to deliver the advertising message to the target audience. Decisions must be made regarding which types of media will be used (e.g., newspapers, magazines, radio, TV, billboards) as well as specific media selections (e.g., a particular magazine or TV program). This task requires careful evaluation of the media options' strengths and limitations, costs, and ability to deliver the message effectively to the target audiences.
* A similar process and set of decisions occur for ALL other elements of the IMC program as objectives are set, an overall strategy is developed, and message and media strategies are determined. If a firm decidesto include a sales promotion, it might decide to use a specific message nad media strategy and tactics to communicate information about the sales promotion, in addition to whatever advertising decisions that have been recommended.
* Furthermore, if a firm considers using multiple tools for its commplete plan it must decide which ones best fit together to solve a particular marketing communication problem. For example, Hellmann's mayonnaise communicate its natural ingredients of eggs, oil, and vinegar to challenge consumers' attitude that the product contained unhealthy contents. The campaign evolved over three years with multiple IMC  tools and media resulting in substantial improvement in brand measures and profitability (Figure 1-9). Finally, an IMC plan might evolve from an initial plan from one tool used, especially advertising. For example, Visa's "Win what you buy" sales promotion built upon the same message of "disappearing debt" conveyed in the television and print ads.

### IMPLEMENT AND CONTROL THE IMC PLAN
* Once the message and media strategies have been determined for each tool, steps must be taken to implement them. Most large companies hire advertising agencies to plan and produce their messages and to evaluate and purchase the media that will carry their ads. however, most agencies work very closely with their clients as they develop the ads and select media, because it is the advertiser that ultimately approves (and pays for) the creative work and media plan. While the marketer's advertising agencies may be used to perform other IMC functions, they may also hire other communication specialist.

                Figure 1-9: Hellman's mayonnaise
                Budget: $3 milllion to $4 million
                Time Frame: January 2007 to December 2009
                Target: Women 18-50
                Strategy Message: Real Food Movement
                Annual Message: Eat Real. Eat Local (2009), Evergreen Partnership (2008), Urban Garden (2007)
                Events: Communty Gardens
                Advertising Media: Television, Newspaper, Magazines
                Sales Promotion: Coupon, Contest, In-store display, Gift/Premium, Discounts
                Internet: Garden widget, forums, eatrealeatlocal.ca, mini-documentary, digital influencers, e-mail;
                public relation: news coverage with Canadian Living and CanWest media partnerships

* It is important to determine how well the promotional program is meeting commmunication and behavioural objectives and helping the firm accomplish its overall marketing objectives. **The promotional planner wants to know not only how well the promotional program is doing but also why. For example, problems with the advertising program may lie in the nature of the message or in a media plan that does not reach the target audience effectively. The manager must know the reasons for the results in order to take the right steps to correct the program.**
* This final stage of  the process is designed to provide managers with continual feedback concerning the effectiveness of the promotional program, which in turn can be used as input into the planning process. As Figure 1-7 shows, information on the results achieved by the promotional program is used in subsequent promotional planning and strategy development.

## IMC Planning: Organization of Text
* This book provides a thorought understanding of advertising and other elements of a firm's promotional mix and shows how they are combined to form a comprehensive marketing communications program with an IMC planning perspective. To implement this idea, we conclude each chapter of the book with an IMC planning section. Its purpose is to relate the chapter material to the content of an IMC plan and illustrateg how to make IMC decisions. The final section of this chatper establishes this approach by illustrating how the entire book is organized around the IMC planning perspective. The book is organized around five major parts to facilitate this goal.

### UNDERSTANDING INTEGRATED MARKETING COMMUNICATION
* Part I comprises four chatpers that define the topic of the book and provide the context for marketing communication decisions. This initial introduces the IMC tools and how they relate to marketing. The chapter also gives a brief description of IMC and the content of a promotional plan.
* We discuss how advertisers work with ad agencies and other firms that provide marketing and promotional services in Chapter 2. Agencies are an important part of the IMC planning process as they assist in the decision making with promotional planners and execute many of the decisions by creating promotional messages.
* To plan, develop, and implement an effective IMC program, those involved must understand consuemr behaviour and the communication process. We focus on consuemr behaviour and the target audience decision, and summarize many communication response models in Chapter 3 and 4, respectively. Combined, these two chatpers establish a conceptual foundation for developing the subsequent decision of an IMC plan.

### ARTICULATE THE MESSAGE
* Part II concerns a number of decisions that firms make to put together a persuasive marketing communication message and comprises five chatpers. The ideas developed here are applicable advertising and all other IMC tools. Sales promotion offers include a brand message, as do public relations activities. All brand-initiated communication in Internet media provides a clear message about the brand.
* Chapter 5 explains how to set IMC objectives to achieve the desired effects. A general model is explained for setting behavioural and communication objectives that are universally applicable to all IMC tools.
* Chapter 6 reviews the important decisions to construct a brand positioning strategy. This is the heart of marketing communication, where decision regarding how brands compete with marketing commmunication messages are determined.
* The most exciting aspects of IMC are presented in Chatper 7 and 8, where we illustrate creative strategy and creative tactics decisions that are reflected in the vibrand and exciting ads we all experience in every part of our daily living. Creative illustration of a brand is the pinnacle task of creative specialists and their work is central for building a brand.
* Chapter 9 examines how to measure promotional message effectiveness. The research ideas presented in this chatper also set the stage for understanding how to assess the effects of all IMC tools found in later chapters.

### DELIVER THE MESSAGE
* Part III comprises four chapters and explores the key media strategy, media tactics decisions and budgeting for IMC, along with the use of six different media.
* Chapter 10 provides the technical information for media planning. Media planning is an important advertising decision and this information is also used to plan media for the implementation of other IMC tools. Scheduling and determining how many consumers should receive a message and how often is critical with Internet media like all other media. Similarly, the timing and media presentation of promotional offers assist in the success of their execution. The chapter also explores how to construct a budget and allocate the budget for advertising and all IMC tools.
* Chatper 11, 12, and 13 describe the use and strengths and limitations of media choices that have been historically labelled as mass media (i.e., television, radio, magazines, newspapers, out-of-home, and support). Once again, background on these topics is useful for implementing advertising and for using these media in executing other IMC tools. Much of these mass media are used to direct consumers to different aspects of Internet media. There are QR codes on outdoor ads. TV and radio messages say "Facebook us" to carry on further communication. These mediaare also used for presentation of community activities designed to "give back" and foster good willamong citizens.

### STRENGTHEN THE MESSAGE
* Our interest turns to the other areas of the promotional mix--sales promotion, public relations, direct marketing, and Internet marketing--in Part IV, "Strengthen the Message". Each tool is explored in its own chapter and related to communication objectives as done in Part III.
* Chapter 14 investigates consumer and trade sales promotions that are often combined with advertising to influence behaviourally and from a communication standpoint. A multitude of options are available for planners to both stimulate sales and enhance brand equity.
* Chapter 15 presents the topic of public relations and related topics of publicity through media and corporate advertising. Using other tools or building a corporate brand through IMC are important topics to fully understand how to put together a complete IMC plan.
* Chapter 16 covers direct marketing and direct-response media used to communicate to this particular IMC yool. Improved technology allows brands to communicate to individuals and vice versa. Methods for advertising and promoting directly are described in this chapter.
* Chapter 17 examines the considerable options for interactive commmunication via the Internet. While continued growth makes this challenge to remain current, the available options and how brands are built with electronic communication are developed to fulfill the need for a comprehensive IMC plan.

### ADVERTISING AND SOCIETY
* Part V concludes the book with one chatper that examines advertising regulation and the ethical, social, and economic effects of an organization's advertising and promotional program. Advertising is a very public and controversial part of any organization's activities and this chatper explores the complexities of these points. Each topic is relevant at varying points of the earlier chatpers and may be read when desired.

## REVIEW
Review Questions
1. Why is marketing communication important for communicating value to consumers?
2. How do smartphone brands use each marketing communication tool for communicating messages?
3. Illustrateg how integrated marekting communications differ from traditional advertsing and promotion. What are the reasons why more marketers are taking an IMC perspective to their advertising and promotion programs?
4. What parts of the IMC planning model are similar to and different from a marketing planning model?
5. How is the structure of the book consiste with the content of an IMC plan?

Applied Questions
1. Consider how a university or college communicate value in its marketing communication to its prospective students and current students. In what ways are the two approaches similar or different? 
2. identify all the possible marketing communication tools that a favourable brand or performing artist is using. Try to explain why these tools were selected. In what ways did the tools support one another? How did they not support one another? Was each tool effective or ineffective?
3. Find examples where all promotional tools have the same "look and feel", and others where there is a different look and feel. Why did these decisions occur based on relevant situation analysis variables?
4. Why is it important for those who work in the field of advertising and promotion to understand and appreciate all IMC tools, not just the area in which they specialize?
5. How does one of your favourite brands link or integrate its different IMC communication tools? Is it done effectively?

# Chapter 2: Organizing for IMC: Role of Agencies
* Developing and implementing an IMC program is usually a commplex process involving the efforts of individuals from the marketing firm, the advertising agency, and often other types of agencies. Strong relationships with these agencies are important as their expertise in creative planning, media placement, new digital executions, and other activities contributes to successful brand development. Alternatively, brands also work with a full-service marketing commmunication agency capable of providing all services. This chatper explores how these agencies function for those who may want to work in the marketing communication agency industry.
* This chapter first identfies the characteristics of a full-service agency and its client relationship. It then describes how agencies are compensated and evaluated. next, the chapter contrasts the role of specialized marketing communication organizations such as creative boutiques, media buying services, direct-response, sales promotion and interactive agencies, and public relations firms. These organizations are increasingly invovled in IMC planning and some are owned by large agencies which they work with considerably. Finally, the chapter evaluates whether marketers are best served by using the integrated services of one large agency or the separate services of multiple marketing communication specialists.

## Advertising Agencies
* Many different types of advertising agencies make the selection a unique decision for each advertiser. in this section we provide a general overview of advertising agencies; we review the agency decision, highlight the agency industry, and describe the activities of a full-service agency.

### ADVERTISING AGENCY DECISION
* Marketing organizations have a fundamental choice of whether a firm will have its own in-house agency or whether it will employ an external advertising agency. We now briefly discuss the relative merits and concerns of both options.

#### In-House Agency
* An **in-house agency** is an advertising agency that is set up, owned, and operated by the advertiser. Some in-house agencies are essentially advertising departments, but in other companies they are given a separate identity and are responsible for the expenditure of large sumes of advertising dollars. Research finds that about half of all companies use an in-house agency and that the likelihood of this occurring decreases with larger advertising budgets but increases with advertising intensity (i.e., advertising/sales ratio), technological intensity, and for creative industries. Many companies use in-house agencies exclusively; others combine in-house efforts with those of outside agencies. For example, Target has an internal creative department that handles the design of its weekly circulars, direct-mail pieces, in-store displays, promotions, and other marketing materials. However, the retailer uses outside agencies to develop most of its branding and image-oriented ads and for specific TV and print assignments. Joe Fresh, a key brand for Loblaw, moved its creativity in-house from an agency to get "our staff thinking about our brand" as it opened up stores in the United States. Coincidentally, that staff of 14 includes a couple of creatives from Target.
* A major reason for using an in-house agency is to reduce advertising and promotion costs. Companies with very large advertising budget pay a substantial amount to outside agencies. An in-house agency can also provide related work--such as sales presentations and sales force materials, package design, and public relations--at a lower cost than outside agencies. A study by M. Louise Ripley found that **creative and media services were the most likely functions to be performed outside, while merchandising and sales promotion were the most likely to be performed in-house.** CL: never knew that, I thought the opposite
* A study by Forrester Research concluded that in-house agencies are preferred because they provide stronger connection to senior managers and stablity for the marketing communication function. They found that nearly 60 percent of in-house agencies report directly to the company's CEO or chief marketing officer (CMO). Furthermore, external agencies yielded much higher turnover levels, which can take a toll on the client-agency relationship.
* Time saving, bad experience with outside agencies, and **the increased knowledge and understanding of the market that come from working on advertising and promotion for the product or service day by day also support in-house agency use**. Companies can also **maintain tighter control over the process more easily coordinate promotions with the firm's overall marketing program.**
* A limitation of an in-house agency is that personnel may grow stale while working on the same product line in comparison to an outside agency where creative specialist design campaigns for a variety of products. Furthermore, **changes in an in-house agency could be slow or disruptive compared to the flexibility of hiring a new outside agency**

#### Advertising Agency
* Many major companies use an advertising agency to assist them in developing, preparing, and executing their promotional programs. An ad agency is a service organization that specializes in planning and executing advertising programs for its clients. Probably the main reason why outside agencies are used in that they provide the client with the services of highly skilled specialists. An advertising agency's staff may include **artists, writers, media analysts, researchers, and other with specific skills, knowledge, and experiecne who can help market the client's products or services** Many agencies specializes in a particular type of business and use their knowledge of the industry to assist their client. For example, Mentus Inc. is an agency that speiclizes in the high-technology, e-commerce, and bioscience industries.
* An outside agency's objective viewpoint of the market and the client's business is not subject to internal company policies, biases, or other limitations. The agency can draw on the broad range of experience it has gained while working on a diverse set of marketing problems for assorted clients. For example, an ad agency handling travel-related account may employ individuals with travel-related industry experience (e.g., airlines, cruise ships, travel agencies, hotels). This industry knowledge may be combined with experience of having previously worked on the advertising account of one of the client's competitors.
* **The Institute of Communications and Advertising offers a comprehensive document that acts as a guide for selecting the most appropriate agency.** using a "best practices" approach, the steps in the search process are carefully diagrammed and explained so that both clients and agencies could benefit. If all the steps are adhered, selecting the right agency could range from 8 to 16 weeks. In the end, the client and agency form a partnership where the responsbilities of each are recorded and agreed upon with the intention of a positive working relationship.

### ADVERTISING AGENCY INDUSTRY
* The Canadian advertising agency industry is similar to that in other industries--there is a combination of small and mid-size domestic firms and large international organizations with domestic service providers. The strong presence of international ad agencies in Canada reflects a global trend of large agencies merged with or acquired by other agencies and support organizations. These **superagencies** now provide clients with integrated marketing communications services worldwide. Many mid-size agencies were acquired by or forged alliances with larger agencies because clients wanted an agency with international marketing communication capabilities, and their alignment with larger organizations permitted access to a network of agencies around the world. Currently, most major agencies offer specialized services in areas of interactive communications, direct marketing, and sales promotion so that they can offer their clients an ever-broader range of IMC services. In fact, a larger multiservice firm is a **marketing communication agency**, making the term "advertising agency" sommewhat obsolete for these situations. Global advertising campaigns are facilitated by using larger international agencies.
* Figure 2-1 summarizes the "agency family tree" produced by Marketing Magazine. The tree identifies all the major players on the Canadian advertising scene. (Note that the original tree spanned eight pages; we retained the scope of the diagram and acknowledge missing information or lack of detail to fit this broad array of information in a single table.) The diea of the superagency is readily observed--we see two major Canadian firms, Vision 7 International and MDC, along with their full agency and other businesses that cater to all marketing communication services. As expected, two major players exist based on new York, Omnicom and Interpublic; each one includes famous advertising agencies recognized for their creative talent.
* Canadian affiliates of these large agencies are responsible for country-based marketing communication activities that are part of the worldwide campaigns. For example, BBDO Proximity of Toronto  developed an Internet application to promote the Gillette Fusion brand in Canada. Additionally, the table includes two major European conglomerates that own established American advertising greats like Ogilvy & Mather, JWT, and Leo Burnett. IMC Perspective 2-1 highlights the accomplishmtns of Canadian agencies.
* Two agencies with strong Canadian roots developed internationally. Over the past decade, Taxi won about 1,200 national and international awards and Strategy named them agency of the year five times. Taxi expanded to the United States and Europe and the prestigious One Club recognized it as one of the top advertising agencies in the world. Acquired by WPP, the agency continue to set new standards of excellence for its clients like Mini. Sid Lee expanded to the United States and Europe as well and developed an international presence for Adidas in 100 countries with its ambitious digital delivery. individual Canadians who achieved success are also in demand internationally, finding top-level positions paying seven figures.
* Many small and mid-sized agencies handle local and regional work throughout Canada. Marketing Magazine featured up-and-coming new agencies in western Canada like Giant Ant Media (Creative Agency/Production Studio) with MEC as a key client, FCV (Interactive Agency) with Telus, Nike, and Scotiabank as key clients, and Smak (Experiential/Media Agency) with Fugure Shop as a key client. Across the country, these independent agencies offer opportunity for students to get their "foot in the door" to pursue a career in the advertising industry. One small agency, Acart in Ottawa, continues to outbid other more dominant players as it secures many government advertising assignments. And in the oldest city in North America, Target of St.John's continues to innovate as it listens to the "beat of a different drum" while enjoying the view of teh Atlantic Ocean. Check out its creative "Weiner News network" on Youtube!

### FULL-SERVICE AGENCY
* The services offered and functions performed vary depending upon the size of the agency. A **full-service agency** offers its clients a complete range of **marketing, communication, and promotion services including planning, performing research, creating the message of the ad campaign, producing the advertising and selecting media.** A full-service agency may also offer nonadvertising services, such as strategic market planning, sales promotions, direct marketing, interactive services, public relations and publicity, and package design. The full-service agency has departments led by a director that provide the activities needed to perform the advertising functions and serve the client, as shown in Figure 2-2. In this section we summarize these main characteristics.

#### Account/Client Service
 Account services, or client services, is the link between the ad agency and its clients. Depending on the size of the client and its advertising budget, one or more account executives serve as liaison. The **account executive** is responsible for understanding the advertiser's marketing and promotions needs and interpreting them to agency personnel. he or she coordinates agency efforts in planning, creating, and producing ads. The account executive also presents agency recommendations and obtain client approval. As the focal point of agency-client relationships, the account executive must know a great deal about the client's business and be able to communicate this to specialists in the agency working on the account. The ideal account executive has a strong marketing background as well as a thorough understanding of all phases of the advertising process.

 #### Planning/Research Services
 * Most full-service agencies maintain a research department whose function is to gather, analyze, and interpret information as input for advertising decisions. Both primary research--where a study is designed, executed, and interpreted by the research department--or secondary (previously published) sources of information are relied upon. The research department also acquires studies conducted by independent syndicated research firms or consultants, inteprets the finding, and disseminates the information to agency personnel working on that account. The research department may also design and conduct research to pretest the effectiveness of advertising the agency is considering. For example, copy testing is conducted to determine how messages developed by the creative specialists are likely to be interpreted by the receiving audience.
 * Research services may be augmented with services performed by account planners, who gather relevant information that can be used to develop the creative strategy and other aspects of the IMC campaign. Account planners work with the client and other agency personnel including the account exeuctives, creative team members, media specialists, and research department personnel to collect information to better understand the client's target audience and the best ways to communicate with them. They gather and organize information about consumers, competitors, and the market to prepare the **creative brief**, which is a document that the agency's creative department uses to guide the development of advertising ideas and concepts.

 page 40

                Figure 2-2: Full Service agency organization chart

                President
                Chief Operations Officer/Chief Financial Officer
                Director, Client Service--Account Director--Account Supervisor--Account Executives
                Director, Planning Research--Account Planner--Market Research
                Creative Services Director--Art Director--Copywriter--Graphic Designer--Studio Artist
                Interactive/Digital Creative Director--Interative Producer--Interactive Developer--Interactive Graphic Designer
                Production Director--Print Production Manager--Broadcast Production Manager--Traffic Manager
                Specialized Services Director--Direct Marketing--Sales Promotion--Public Relation--Event and Support Service
                Media Director--Media Planner--Media Buyer
                Management and Finance Department--Accountant--Financial Manager--Office Manager--Human Resource