# CHAPTER 1: AN INTRODUCTION TO CONSUMER BEHAVIOUR

## INTRODUCTION

### Consumer Behaviour: People in the Marketplace
* This book is about people like you. It concerns the products and services you buy and use and the ways these purchases fit into your lives. This introductory chpater briefly describes some important aspects of the field of consumer behaviour and some of the essential explanations for how people interact with the marketing system.
* For now, though, let's look at one "typical" consumer: you. This brief discussion allows us to highlight some aspects of consumer behaviour that will be covered in the rest of this book.

* As a consumer, you can be described and compared with other individuals in a number of ways. For some purposes, marketers might find it useful to categorize you in terms of your age, sex, income, or occupation. These are some examples of objectively measurable descriptive characteristics of a population, or demographics. In other cases, marketers would rather know something about your interests in clothing or music, or the way you spend your leisure time. This sort of psychological information comes under the category of psychographics, which can include aspects of a person's lifestyle, interests, attitudes, values, and personality. Knowledge of consumer demographics and psychographics plays an extremely important role in many marketing applications, such as defining the market for a product or deciding upon the appropriate techniques to employ when targeting a certain group of consumers.
* Your purchase decisions are heavily influenced by the opinions and behaviours of your friends. A lot of product information, as well as recommendations to use or avoid particular brands, is transmitted by conversation among real people rather than by way of TV commercials, magazines, billboards, or even bizarre websites. The web has created thousands of online consumption communities where members share views and product recommendations about anything from airline loyalty programs to iPhone apps. The bonds among peer groups are cerented by the products they use in common. There is also pressure on each group member to buy things that will meet with the group's approval, and there is often a price to pay in the form of group rejection or embarrassment when one member does not conform to others' conception of what is good or bad, "in" or "out".
* As members of a large society, people share certain cultural values or strongly held beliefs about the way the world should be structured. Other values are shared by members of subcultures, or smaller groups within the culture, such as French Canadians, teens, "prairie people", or even Hell Angels.
* When examining websites, you are exposed to many competing brands. There might be numerous sites that do not capture your attention at all, while there are others that you barely notice or reject because they do not fit the "image" with which you identify or to which you aspire. Using market segmentatino strategies means targeting a brand only to a specific group of consumers rather than to everybody--even if it means that other consumers will not be interested in or may even deliberately avoid that brand.
* Brand often have clearly defined images or "personalities" created by prodcut advertising, packaging, branding, and other marketing strategies that focus on positioning a product a certain way. The choice of a favourite website is very much a lifestyle statement: it says a lot about what a person is interested in as well as sommething about the type of person he or she would like to be. people often choose a product because they like its image or because they feel that its personality somehow corresponds to their own. Moreover, consumers may believe that when they buy and use the product or service its desirable qualities will "rub off" onto them.
* When a product succeeds in satisfying a customer's specific needs or desires, it may be rewarded with many years of brand loyalty, a bond between product and consumer that is very difficult for competitors to break. Often a change in the consumer's life situation or self-concept is required to weaken this bond and thus create opportunities for competitors.
* Consumers' evaluations of products are affected by the products' appearance, taste, texture, or smell. We may be swayed by the shape and colour of a package as well as by more subtle factors such as the symbolism used in a brand name, in an advertisement, or even in the choice of a cover model for a magazine. These judgments are affected by--and often reflect--how a society feels that people should define themselves at that point in time. If asked, you might not even be able to say exactly why you considered some websites and rejected others. many product meanings are hidden below the surface of t he packaging and advertising, and this book will discuss some of the methods used by marketers and social scientists to discover or apply these meanings.
* Our opinions and desires are increasingly shaped by input from around the world, which is becoming a much small place because of rapid advancements in communications technology and transportation systems. In today's global culture, consumers often prize products and services that "transport" them to different places and allow them to experience the diversity of other cultures--even if only to watch others brush their teeth.

### What is Conumser Behaviour
* The field of consumer behaviour covers a lot of ground: **It is the study of the processes involved when individuals or group select, purchase, use, or dispose of products, services, ideas, or experiences to satisfy needs and desires.** Consumers take many forms, ranging from an eight-year-old child begging her mother for a Monster High doll to an executive at a large corporation choosing a multimillion-dollar computer system. The items that are consumed can include anything from **canned peas to a massage, democracy to hip hop, and even other people (e.g., the images of rock stars)**. Need and desires to be satisfied range from **hunger and thirst to love, status, or even spirtual fulfillment**. And, as we'll see throughout this book, people can get passionate about a broad range of products.

#### Consumer Behaviour is a process
* In its early stages of development, the field of consumer behaivour was often referred to as buyer behaviour, **reflecting an emphasis on the interaction between consumers and producers at the time of purchase. Marketers now recognize that consumer brhaviour is an ongoing process, not merely what happens at the moment a consumer hands over money or a credit card and in turn receives a good or service.**

        Some issues that arise during stages in the consumption process

        | | Consumer Perspective | Marketer's perspective
        |---| ---| ---|
        | Prepurchase issues| How does a consumer decides that he or she needs a product? What are the best sources of information to learn more about alternative choices | How are consumer attitude toward products formed and changed? What cues do consumers use to infer which products are superior to others? |
        | Purchase Issues | Is acquiring a product a stressful or pleasant experience? What does the purchase say about the consumer? | How do situational factors, such as **time pressure or store displays**, affect the consumer's purchase decision?
        | Postpurchase Issues | Does the product provide pleasure or perform its intended function? How is the product eventually disposed of, and what are the environmental consequences of this act? | What determines whether a consumer will be satisfied with a product and whether he or she will buy it again? Does this person tell others about his or her experiences with the product that affects their purchase decisions?

* The exchange, in which two or more organizations or people give and receive something of value, is an integral part of marketing. Although exchange is an important part of consumer behaviour, the expanded view emphasizes the entire consumption process, which includes the issues that influences the consumer before, during, and after a purchase.

## CONSUMERS' IMPACT ON MARKETING STRATEGY
* Why should managers, advertisers, and other marketing professionals bother to learn about consumer behaviour? Very simply, understanding consumer behaivour is good business. A basic marketing concept states that **firms exist to satisfy consumers' needs. These needs can be satisfied only to the extent that marketers understand the people or organizations that will use the products and services they are trying to sell--and do so better than their competitors.**
* **Consumer response is the ultimate test of whether a marketing strategy will succeed.** Thus, **knowledge about consumers is incorporated into virtually every facet of a successful marketing plan**. **Data about consumers help marketers define the market and identify threats to a brand and opportunities for it.** And, **in the world of marketing, nothing is forever.** This knowledge also helps ensure that the product continues to appeal to its core market. The purpose of understanding consumer behaviour is to predict the future. **Anyone can see what is happening at present, but in consumer behaviour we are also focused on tomorrow.** Throughout this book, we will highlight takeaways from consumer behaviour for marketers in boxes entitled "Marketing Insight".

### Segmenting Consumers
* The process of marketing segmentation identifies groups of consumers who are similar to one another in one or more ways and then devises marketing strategies that appeal to one or more groups. As our society evolves from a mass culture in which many consumers share the same preferences to a diverse one in which we have almost an infinite number of choices, it's more important than ever to identify distinct market segments and develop specialized messages and products. It's also important to deliver those specialized messages through diverse channels.
* As we'll see later, building loyalty to a brand is a very smart marketing strategy,so sometimes companies define markets segments by identifying their most faithful customers or heavy users. For example, in the fast-food industry the loyal user accounts for only one of five customers but for about 60 percent of all visits to fast-food restaurants. Aside from frequent use of a product, there are many dimensions that can be used to slice up a larger market.
* As we've already seen, demographics are statistics that measure observable aspects of a population, such as birth rate, age distribution, and income. Statistics Canada is a major source of demographic data on families. This informaiton is available at www.statcan.gc.ca. The changes and trends revealed in demographic studies are of great interest to marketers, because the data can be used to locate and predict the sizes of markets for many products, ranging from home mortgages to brooms and can openers. Imagine trying to sell baby-food to a single male, or an around-the-world vacation to a couple making $15000 a year!
* Table 1-1 below provides a statistical snapshot of the "typical" Canadian consumer, based on data compiled from Statistics Canada. As you go down this list, you will quickly see that many characteristics do not apply directly to you. How different are you from this consumer?

        Table 1-1: A Statistical Picture of the Average or Typical Canadian Consumer
        * The typical Canadian is a woan who is 39.9 years old.
        * The average Canadian worked approximately 36.4 hours per week in 2011
        * The average income of a Canadian was approximately $840 per week in 2011.
        * In 2010, the average Canadian household spent $14,997 on shelter
        * In 2010, the average household spent $894 on personal care
        * The average household spent $3452 on clothing purchases in 2010
        * The average household spent $3539 on recreation in 2010
        * The average Canadian watched 20.06 hours of television per week in 2010.

* In consumers' personalities, attitudes, values, and lifestyles. For now, let's summarize a few of the most important demographic dimensions, each of which will be developed to more detail in later chapters.

###### AGE
* Consumers of different age groups obviously have very different needs and wants. Although people who belongs t o the same age group differ in many other ways, they tend to share a set of values and common cultural experiences that they carry throughout life. **In some cases marketers initially develop a product to attract one age group and then try to broaden its appeal later on.** That's what the energy drink Red Bull has done. Red Bull was originally introduced in bars, nightclubs, and gyms to the product's core audience of young people. Over time, the drink became popular in other contexts, and now the company is sponsoring the PGA European Tour to broaden its reach to older individuals. It's also handing out free cans to commuters, cab drivers, and car-rental agencies to market the drink as a way to stay alert on the road.

###### GENDER
* Many products, from fragrances to footwear, are targeted at either men or women. Differentiating by gender starts at a very early age--even diapers are sold in pink versions for girls and blue for boys. An all-female marketing team at Procter & Gamble, who jokingly call themselves "chicks in charge", introduced Crest Rejuvenating Effects, the first mass-market toothpaste positioned just for woemn. P&G communicates that this product is feminine when the company packages it in teal tube nestled inside a glimmering "pearlescent" box. The toothpaste is sparkly, teal-toned, and tastes like vanilla and cinnamon.

###### FAMILY STRUCTURE AND LIFE STAGE
* A person's family structure and marital status is another important demographic variable, because it has such a big effect on a consumer's spending priority. Young singles and newlyweds are the most likely to exercise, go to bars, concerts, and movies, and consume alcohol. Families with young children are big purchasers of health foods and fruit juices, while single-parent households and those with older children buy more junk food. Home maintenance services are most likely to be used by older couples and dual-career couples.

###### SOCIAL CLASS AND INCOME
* People grouped within the same social class are approximately equal in terms of their incomes and social standing in the community. They work in roughly similar occupations, and they tend to have similar tastes in music, clothing, art, and so on. They also tend to socialize with one another and share many ideas and values regarding the way life should be lived. The distribution of wealth is of great interest to marketers because it determines which groups have the greatest buying power and market potential.

###### ETHNICITY
* Multiculturalism and Canada go hand in hand. This country comprises immigrants from all over the globe. Canada accepts nearly 1 million immigrants and refugees every four years, by far the highest per capita rate of immigration in the world. We are diverse in our languages and in the cultural consumption that stems from our different ethnicities. For example, English is now a minority language in Vancouver. The growth of the Asian market in Canada has led to trilingual labeling of some products. Since Canadians blend together from many different racial and cultural backgrounds, we also blend together in our consumption heritage, as signified by food. As a culture, we are just as likely to enjoy eating sushi as pyrophy (a.k.a perogies) or lasagna.

###### GEOGRAPHY
* The climate changes drastically from region to region in Canada, which makes segmenting some products by region obvious. For example, more snow blowers and fur coats are sold east of the Rocky Mountains, more umbrellas and raincoats to the west. Humidifiers and dehumidifiers are a must in regions around the Great Lakes. On the Prairies, it is not unusual for people to have two or more freezers in their basements; many people who live in farming regions preserve the food they produce for winter and year-round consumption.
* Within regions, there are some different cultural pockets and hence differences in food tastes. New Brunswick has teh highest consumption of sliced white bread, while Alberta leads in bubblegum sales. Most corn flakes are sold on t he Prairies, and linguini has its highest sales in Toronto. Quebecers consume the least amount of frozen french fries, preferring the real thing.

###### LIFESTYLES: BEYOND DEMOGRAPHICS
* Consumers also have very different lifestyles, even if they share other characteristics such as gender or age. The way we feel about ourselves, the things we value, the things we like to do in our spare time--all of these factors help determine which products will push our buttons, or even those that will make us feel better. As one example, the car company VM decided to market to consumers who followed the MTV program Pimp My Ride and enjoyed the activities involved in restoring into trickled-out street machines. To do so, they released a series of online viral ad videos featuring a German engineer and his assistant "unpimping" autos belongs to those that enjoy this specific lifestyle. By poking fun, the VM brand attracted individuals to watch the ad and pass it along to others with similar interests.

### Relationship Marketing: Building Bonds with Consumers
* **Marketers are carefully defining customer segments and listening to people in their markets as never before. Many of them have realized that a key to success is building relationships that will last a lifetime between brands and customers.** Relationship marketing involves making an effort to interact with customers on a regular basis, **giving them reasons to maintain a bond with the company over time.** Tony Roma's, a rib restaurant, practises the notion of relationship marketing in a very simple way--by sending regular customers a coupon for their birthdays that entitles them to free meal at the restaurant.

### MARKETING'S IMPACT ON CONSUMERS
* Does marketing imitate life or vice versa? After the movie The Wedding Crashers becam a big hit, hotels, wedding planners, and newlyweds reported an outbreak of uninvited guests who tried to gain access to parties across the United States. For better or for worse, we all live in a world that the actions of marketers and the media significantly influence. Throughout in this book, we will highlight the ways in which marketers influence consumers in boxes entitled "Consumers in Focus".
* We are surrounded by marketing stimuli in the form of advertisements, stores, and products competing for our attention and our dollars. Marketers filter much of what we learn about the world, whether through the affluence they depict in glamorous magazines or the roles actors play in commercials. Ads show us how we should act with regard to recycling, alcohol consumption, and even the types of houses and cars we wish to own. In many way we are also "at the mercy" of marketers, since we rely on them to sell us products t hat are safe and that perform as promised, to tell us the truth about what they are selling, and to price and distribute these products fairly.

#### Marketing and Culture
* Popular culture, consisting of the music movies, sports, books, celebrities, and other forms of entertainment consumed by the mass market, is both a product and an inspiration for marketers. Our lives are also affected in far-reaching ways, ranging from how we acknowledge cultural events such as marriage, death, or holidays to how we view social issues susch as air pollution, gambling, and addition. The Stanley cup, holiday shopping, federal elections, container recycling, and tweeting are all examples of products and activities that touch many lives.
* This cultural influence is difficult to overlook, althoough many people do not seem to realize how much of their views of the world around them--their movie and musical heroes, the latest fashions, food and decorating choices, and event the physical features they find attractive or ugly in men and women--are affected by marketers. For example, consider the product icons that marketers use to create an identity for their products. Various mythical creatures and personalities--from the Pillbury Doughboy to Sasquatch--have been at one time or another central figures in popular culture. In fact, it is likely that more consumers could recognize such characters than could identify past prime ministers, business leaders, or artists. Although  the characters never really existed, many of use feel as if we "know" them, and they certainly are effect "spokecharacters" for the products they represent.
* Consumer-generated content, in which consumers themselves voice their opinions about products, brands, and companies on blogs, podcasts, and social networking sites such as Facebook, and even film their own commercials that thousands view on sites such as Youtube, is also an important part of marketing's influence on culture. Doritos has utilized consumer-generated ads in their Super Bowl advertising since 2006, and these ads often score top honours as the ad that the most vieweres remember. Videos like the one for Rebecca Black's song "Rriday" have shown that anyone can product content that, even if strongly disliked by the majority of consumers, finds its way into the broader North American culture.

#### The Meaning of Consumption
* One of the fundamentla premises of the modern field of consumer behaviour is **that people often buy products not for what they do but for what they mean.** This principle does not imply that a product's basic function is unimportant, but rather that the roles products play in our lives go well beyond the tasks they perform. And the deeper meanings of a product may help it to stand out from others, similar goods and services. Other things being equal, a person will choose the brand that has an image (or even a personality) consistent with his or her underlying needs.
* For example, although most people probably couldn't run faster or jump higher if they were wearing Nike shoes as opposed to Adidas,  many diehard loyalists swear by their favourite brand. These arch-rivals are largely marketed in terms of their images--meanings carefully crafted with the help of legions of rock stars, athletes, and slickly produced commercials--and many millions of dollars. So when you buy a Nike "swoosh", **you may be doing more than choosing footwear; you may also be making a lifestyle statement about the type of person you are or want to be. For a relatively simple item made of leather and laces, that's quite a feat!**
* Our allegiances to particular sneakers, musicians, or soft drinks help us define our place in modern society, and these choices also help us form bonds with others who share similar preferences. This comment by a participant in a focus group captures the curious bonding that can be caused by consumption choices: " I was at a Stanley Cup party, and I picked up an obscure drink. Somebody else across the room went "Yo!" because he had the same thing. People feel connection when you're drinking the same thing.

#### The Global Consumer
* The majority of people on Earth live in urban centres. In fact, the number of megacities, defined as urban centres of 10 million people or more, is projected to grow to 26 in 2015. Already, China boasts four shopping centres that are larger than the massive West Edmonton Mall, and within five years it will be home to seven of the world's largest malls. One by-product of sophisticated marketing strategies is the movement toward a global consumer culture, in which people around the world are united by their common devotion to brand-name consumer goods, movie stars, and celebrity.
* We owe much of this interconnectedness to developments in technology that allow us to link with companies--and with each other--regardless of our phsyical location. U-commerce is the use of ubiquitous networks, whether in the form of wearable computers or customized advertisements beamed to us on our cell phones ("Hey, you're walking by McDonald's. Come on in for today's burger special".), that enable real-time connecitons in business and consumption behaviour.
* Many products already carry a plastic RFID tag containing a computer chip and a tiny antenna that lets the chip communicate with a network. Grocery items will tell  the store what needs to be restocked and which items and past their expiration dates, and your house will know when you're pulling in the driveway as it turns on the lights and starts your favourite tunes spinning before you walk in the door. Already IBM has introduced "smart" washers and dryers in some college and university dorms that let students keep tabs on their laundry from anywhere they can access the Internet--their dorm rooms, the library, or cell phone. Student can log onto a webpage to see if any machines are free and receive an email or text when their load is finished.
* The rise of globa marketing means that even smaller companies are looking to expand overseas--and this increases the pressure to understand how customers in other countries are the same as or different from the customers in the host country. In the restaurant industry, for example, Shakey's pizza restaurants are mushrooming in the Philipines, and food from the International House of Pancakes is selling like hotcakes in Tokyo. But menu changes are sometimes called for to please local palates: Schlozsky's in Malasia offers Smoky Mountain Chicken Crunch with "half-virgin" chicken, and diners in Bob's Big Boy in Thailand snap up Tropical Shrimp, deep fried with "exotic breading". This book pays special attention to the good and bad aspects of this cultural homogenization.

###### VIRTUAL CONSUMPTION
* Electronic marketing increases convenience by breaking down many of the barriers caused by time and location. You can shop 24 hours a day without leaving home and you can find a product online at an e-tailer in another country and order it for delivery--whether you are at home or somewhere else around the globe.
* And it's not all about business selling to consumers (B2C commerce). In addition, virtual consumption has greatly facilitated consumer-to-consumer activity (C2C commerce). Just as e-consumers are not limited to local retail outlets in their shopping they are not limited to their local communities when looking for friends.
* Picture a small group of local collectors who meet once a month at a local diner to discuss their shared interests over coffee. Now multiply that group by thousands, and include people from all over the world with a shared passion for sports memorabilia, Barbie dolls, Harley-Davidson motorcycles, refrigerator magnets, or massively multiplayer online games such as WOW. These are examples of virtual brand communities.
* The Web also provides an easy way for onsumers around the world to exchange informatio nabout their experiences. Sites like RottenTomatoes.com, retail sites like Amazon.com, and RatemyProfessors.come enable consumers to share their thoughts and feelings on everything from movies, to books, to the professor they had last semester.
* If you're a typical student, you probably can't recall a time when the Internet was just a static, one-way platform that transmitted text and a few sketchy images. The term digital native originated to describe students that have grown up "wired" in a highly networked, always-on world where digital technology had always existed. Today the Internet is the backbone of our society. Widespread access to device like personal computers, digital video and audio recorders, webcams, and smartphones ensures that consumers or practically any age and who live in virtually any part of the world can create and share content. But information doesn't just flow from big companies or governments down to the people, today to the people; today each of us can communicate with huge numbers of people by a click on a keypad, so information flows across people as well.
* That's what we mean by a **horizontal revolution**. This horizontal revolution is characterized in part by the prevalence of social media. Social media are the online means of communication, conveyance, collaboration, and cultivation among interconnected and interdependent networks of people, communities, and organizations enhanced by technological capabilities and mobility.
* Facebook, the largest social media platform, offers synchoronous interactions (ones that occur in real time, as when you text back and forth with a friend) and asynchronous interactions (ones that don't require all participants to respond immediately, as when you text a friend and get an answer the next day), photo sharing, games, applications, groups, e-retailing, and more, and currently has more than 845 million active users. if Facebook were a country, it would be the third-most-populated in the world. And people aren't just joining social communities, they are contributing too! Youtube users upload more than 35 hours of video every minute of every day. That's roughly equivalent to 176,000 full-length movies uploaded weekly. In just 30 days on Youtube, more video is broadcast than in the past 60 years on CBS, NBC, and ABC broadcasting networks combined. Consider these mind-boggling social media stats:

                * If you were paid $1 for every time an article was posted on Wikipedia, you would earn $156.23 per hour
                * It took radio 38 years to reach 50 million listeners. TV took 13 years to reach 50 million users. The Internet took four years to reach 50 million people. In under nine months, Facebook added 100 million users.
                * About 70 percents of Facebook users are outside the United States
                * Social media activity has overtaken porn as  the number one online activity.
                * One out of eight couples married last year met using a social media site
                * Eight percent of companies use Linkedin as their primary recruiting tool
                * Twenty-fve percent of search results for the world's top ten brands are to user-generated content.
                * More than 1.5 million pieces of content are shared on Facebook daily.
                * Eight percent of Twitter usage is from mobile devices, and 17 percent have tweeted while on the toilet.

* This is all exciting stuff, especially because social media platforms enable a culture of participation--a belief in democracy; the ability to freely interact with other people, companies, and organizations; open access to ventures  that allows users to share content from simple comments to reviews, ratings, photos, stories, and more; and the power to build on the content of others from one's own unique point of view. Of course, jsut as with democracy in the real world, we have to take the bitter with the sweet. There are plenty of unsavoury things going on in cyberspace, and the hours people spend on Facebook, on online gambling sites, or in virtual worlds such as Second Life, have led divorce, bankruptcy, or jail in the real world.

### Markting Ethics and Public Policy
* In business, conflicts often arise between the goal of succeeding in the marketplace and the desire to conduct business honestly and to maximize the well-being of consuemrs by providing them with safe and effective products and services. Accordingly, many universities and corporations are now focusing very intently on teaching and reinforcing ethical behaviour.

###### BUSINESS ETHICS
* Business ethics are essentially rules of conduct that guide actions in the marketplace--the standards against which most people in a marketplace judge what is right, wrong, good, or bad. These universal values include honesty, trustworthiness, fairness, respect, justice, integrity, concern for others, accountability, and loyalty.
* Ethical business is good business. Consumers think better of products made by firms they feel are behaving ethically. But jsut what is ethical behaviour? Sometimes it's not so easy to tell. For example, when you download songs from Kazaa or other filesharing programs, are you stealing? The film and recording industries think you are!
* Notions of right and wrongs do differ across people, organizations, and cultures. Some businesses, for example, believe it is all right for salespeople to persuade customers to buy even if it means giving them false information, while other firms feel that anything less than total honesty with customers is terribly wrong. Because every culture has its own set of values, beliefs, and customs, ethical business behaviours are defined quite differently around the world. For example, one recent study found that because of differences in values (more on this in Chapter 6). Mexican firms are less likely to have formal codes of ethics and more likely to bribe public officials than are Amercian or Canadian commpanies. On the other hand, different attitudes about work and interpersonal relationship mean that Mexican companies are also more likely to treat lower-level employees better than do their NAFTA partners to the north.

###### PRESCRIBING ETHICAL STANDARDS OF CONDUCT
SKIM

### NEEDS AND WANTS: DO MARKETERS MANIPULATE CONSUMERS
* One of the most common and stinging cricisms of marketing is that marketing techniques (especially advertising) are responsible for convincing consumers that they "need" many material things and that they will be unhappy and somehow inferior people if they do not have these "necessities". The issue is a commplex one and is certainly worth considering: Do marketers give people what they want, or they tell people what they should want?

##### Subheader: Do Marketers Create Artificial Needs?
* The marketing system has come under fire from both ends of teh political spectrum. On the one hand, some believe that advertising contributes to the moral breakdown of society by presenting images of hedonistic pleasure, thus encouraging the pursuit of secular humanism. On the other hand, some argue  that the same deceitful promises of material pleasure function to buy off people who would  otherwise be revolutionaries working to chnage the system. Through advertising, the system creates demand that only its products can satisfy.
* One such response to this argument is that **a need is a basic biological motive, while a want represents one way society has taught us to satisfy that need**. For example, while thirst is biologically based, we are taught to want Coca-Cola to satisfy that thirst rather than, say, goat's milk. **Thus, the need is already there; marketers simply recommend ways to satisfy it. A basic objective of advertising is to create awareness that these needs exist, rather  than to create the needs.**

#### Subheader: Are Advertising and Marketing Neccessary?
* As social critic Vance Packard wrote: "large-scale efforts are being made, often with impressive success, to channel our unthinking habits, our purchasing decisions, and our thought processes by the use of insights gleaned from psychiatry and the social sciences". The economist John Kenneth Galbraith felt that radio and TV are important tools to accomplish this manipulation of the masses. Since virtually no literacy is required to use these media, they allow repetitive and compelling communications to reach almost everyone. This criticism may be even more relevant to online communications, where a simple click delivers a world of information us.
* **Goods are arbitrarily linked t o desirable social attributes. One influential critic even argued that the problem is that we are not materialistic enough; that is, we do not sufficiently value goods for the utilitarian functions they deliver but instead focus on the irrational value of goods for what they symbolize.** According to this view, for eample, "beer would be enough for us, without the additional promise that in drinking it we show ourselves to be manly, young at heart, or neighbourly."
* One response to this particular argument is that products are designed to meet existing needs, and **advertising merely helps to communicate the products' availability**. According to the economics-of-information perspective, advertising is an important source of consumer information. This view emphasizes t he economic cost of the time spent searching for products, arguing that consuemrs are willing to pay for advertising because the information it provides reduces search time.

##### Subheader: Welcom to Consuemr Space
* Who controls the market--companies or consumers? This question is becoming even more complictated as new ways of buying, having, and being are invented every day. it seems that the "good old days" of marketer space, in which companies called the shots and decided what they wanted their customers to know and do, are dead and gone. Many people now feel empowered to choose how, when, or if they will interact with corporations as they construct their own consuemr space. **In turn companies need to develop and leverage brand equity in bold new ways to attract the loyalty of these consumer "nomads". People still "need" companies--but in new ways and on their own terms.** As we'll see throughout this book, profound changes in consumer behaviour are influencing how people search for product information and evaluate alternative brands. In today's consumer space, we have the potential to shape our own marketing destinies.

##### Subheader: Public Policy and Consumerism
* The welfare of the consumer is protected by many laws at the deferal, provincial, and mulicipal levels. Regulations put forth by these governmental agencies sometimes overlap and are constantly changing. The main thrust of regulation is to protect the consumer from unfair business practices and to protect the broad interests of society. Laws that involve "cooling-off" periods for signing the purchase agreements try to protect average consumers from getting into things they later regre. Other laws, such as labelling of harmful products (e.g., cigarettes) and the prohibition of sales of certain substances (e.g., melatonin), are meant to protect the health of Canadians. Some of the various laws are outlined in Table 1-2

                SKIP Table 1-2

* the field of consumer behaviour can play an important role in improving our lives as consumers. Many researchers assist in formulating or evaluating public policies such as those that ensure that products are labelled accurately, that people can understand important information presented in advertising, or that children are not exploited by program length toy commercials  misquerading as TV shows.
* Of course, to a large degree consumers depend on their governments to regulate and police safety and environmental standards. Protecting consumers is more problematic this centry as the majority of manufacturing has moved offshore. Millions of Chinese-made toys are regularly pulled off shelves because of lead paint or basic design flaws. MEGA Brands used to be a darling of the Canadian stock exchange, but finanical losses from product recalls of poorly manufactured and designed toys have left the company hurting. These problems are not limited to hard goods. A major Chinese supermarket chain in Canada had to pull a possibly tained baby milk formula after 6000 babies were sickened in China. The Chinese-made brands were suspected of containing melamine, a chemical that makes the product appear to have higher protein levels than it actually does.

#### Subheader: Consumer Activism and its Impact on Marketing
* Adbusters is a not-for-profit organization that advocates for "the new social activist movement of the information age." Adbusters sponsors numerous initiatives, including Buy Nothing Day and TV Turnoff week, intended to discourage rampand commercialism. These efforts, along with biting ads and commercials that lampoon advertising messages, are part and parcel of a strategy called **culture jamming** that aims to disrupt efforts by the corporate world to dominate our cultural landscape. The Cultural jammers Manifesto proclaims opposition to the so-called mind-poluuters: "On the rubble of the old culture, we will build a new one with a non-commercial heart and soul." Indeed, Adbusters was at the forefront in starting the Occupy movement seen in 2011 in a number of North Amercian cities.
* Firms themselves are becoming increasingly interested in Corporate Social Responsibility, by which they voluntarily choose to protect or enhance their positive social and environmental impacts as they go about their business activities. This is often driven by consumer demand, as companies attempt to differentiate themselves in the marketplace. Companies such as the Lush, the Body Shop, and American Apparel have successfully differentiated themselves on ethical attributes. While some marketers donate their own money to good cause (corporate giving), others promise donations to charity as purchase incentives (a form of cause-related marketing). Other firms have taken a green marketing approach in which they offer products in ways that are less harmful to the environment. Some firms have focused their efforts on reducing wasteful packaging, as when P&G introduce refillable containers for Downy fabric softener.
* **Social marketing** refers to using marketing techniques normally employed to sell beer or detergent to encourage positive behaviour such as increased literacy or to discourage negative activities such as drunk driving. 

SKIP A LOT

### Header: HOW DO WE FIND OUT ABOUT CONSUMERS? THE ROLE OF CONSUMER RESEARCH
* As noted above, marketers often wish to find out about consumers' attitudes, opinions, behaviours, and preferences because by understanding the consumer, the marketer is best able to appeal to relevant needs. To this end, marketers often engage in various forms of consumer (marketing) research. Two ways this can be done are by the researcher specifically for the research question at hand, this is called **primary research**. However, sometimes the marketer can find the information needed by going to a pre-existing source of information collected for another purpose. When the researcher uses data collected by another entity to answer a new research question, this is called **secondary research**. For example, as noted above, when the Government of Canada collects statistical information regarding its citizens marketers may use this information to provide insights about the consumer in ways that inform marketing strategy (www.statcan.gc.ca)

### Bigheader: Primary Research
* A number of options are available to marketers and consuemr researchers who want to collect primary data regarding consumers. As we will see, common techniques include surveys, focus groups, interviews, observational research, qualitative methods, and experiments.

###### Subheader: SURVEY RESEARCH
* one common method of data collection is using surveys. A survey is a method of data collection in which the respondents self-report answers to a set of questions posed by the researcher. The most common forms of surveys include  written surveys, online surveys, and phone surveys. Surveys can include a variety of types of questions including those calling for open-ended responses, those requiring fill-in-the-blanks, and those using rating scales. As with any data collection technique, surveys have pros and cons. This research method using allows researchers to collect data from a lot of people within a relative short period of time, but may not allow consumers to provide as rich as detailed responses as other research methods.

###### Subheader: FOCUS GROUP
* Because of some of the limitations of the survey method, researchers sometimes turn to focus group research. Focus groups usually involve small group sessions with appropriate **six to twelve consumer participants**. The session is guided by a moderator who leads a group discussion involving a product, concept, or marketing message. Focus groups are often used when a new idea or product is being tested, or the researchers group are often used when a new idea or product is being tested, or the researchers want to generate new ideas for what strategic direction to take next. As you might guess, one benefit of focus group is that they tend to **elicit more rich, detailed, and narrative feedback from consumers.** One drawback, however, is that social influence can play a role, dampening the expression of consumers' true individual attitudes (see chapter 11) for a discussion of some of these effects.

###### Subheader: INTERVIEW
* One other research technique is to utilize in-depth interviews. Like focus group, interviews involve direct contact with the consumer. In contrast to focus group, this approach involves a one-on-one interaction with an interviewer and respondent. Interviews allow the researcher to collect rich, in-depth data, but minimize any impacts of group factors influencing consumer responding. Interviews can be particularly useful if the topic is sensitive, embarrassing, or polarizing in some way. The downside of interviews is that the research process can take much longer and is much more expensive if each consumer is being asked questions one at a time.

###### Subheader: OBSERVATIONAL RESEARCH
* Another technique commonly employed by marketers is **observational research**. In this type of research consumer behaviours are directly observed, in either a natural context (e.g., at the mall) or a controlled setting (e.g., a lab that observes how children play with new toy products). One drawback of surveys, focus groups, and interviews is that they all involve the consumers themselves reporting on their attitudes, behaviours, or experiences. **One issue with this is that consumers may not always express the truth**; perhaps because they wish to present themselves positively to the researcher, because they don't recall everything accurately, or because they are not consciously aware of all the factors influencing their behaviours. Observation has the benefit of directly tracking and messuring real behaviour.
* One specific type of observation involves **ethnographic research**, in which researchers observe and record how consumers behaviour to real-world contexts, often to understand the meaning consumers subscribe to different consumption experiences. Sometimes the researcher goes as far as to immerse him or herself in the consumption setting, observing people in context over long periods. A famous example of this approach is Intuit's "follow me home" program, in which the researchers asked purchasers of Intuit's software products if they could follow them home to observe how they interacted with and use the software.
* A final type of observational research is centred in technological forms of behavioural observation. Scanner technology and clickstream data gathering are two examples of this type of observation method. Grocery stores such as Safeway and Safe-On-Foods utilize membership cards to observe consumer purchases in an effort to build large databases that inform them on everything from stocking to promotional to pricing decisions. Google analytics is an example of an observation research system that tracks consumer behaviour on websites and provides the using organization with information on clickthrough behaviour and length of time spent on specific webpages.

###### Subheader: QUALITATIVE RESEARCH
* Researchers also can use other measures to get at **more subjective aspects of consumer behaviour and experiences. One such techniques is storytelling, in which consuemrs are asked to tell researchers about their experience with the product. Another technique is role-playing, in which consumers are asked to put themselves in a particular role** (e.g., "Imagine you are a mother of an active family") and act out how they would respond to a particular marketing stimulus (e.g., a mechanized vaccum that does the cleaning for you) **MY this is useful** Other avenues for gathering information include asking consumer to provide photos or pictures in ways that represent their consumption experiences or to keep a diary that tracks responses and behaviours over a period of time. Believe it or not, when seeking ideas for a new line of deodorant, Unilever asked female consumers to keep an "armpit diary", tracking their shaving havits and deodorant usage over time. It turned out the women reported concerns with the condition of their underarm skin, and a new moisturizing line of deodorant was born. All of these are eaxamples of what is called qualitative research, because they tend to tap into the more subjective, experimental, and narrative aspects of the consumption experience.
* When marketers want to collect qualitative data regarding consumers' responses to marketing stimuli that they believe consuemrs will have trouble in providing accurate, unbiased responses they use **projective techniques**. These involves the presentation of an ambiguous, unstructured object, activity, or person that a respondent is asked to interpret or explain. For example, **if the marketer wanted to test potential brand names, they might ask consumers to report, as quickly as possible what words come to mind when they see a particular target word.** The goal here is to choose words congruent with brand image and to not trigger negative consumer reactions. Other projective techniques can involve picture interpretation **(i.e., the consumer is asked to describe what they see in a visual image) and sentence completion tasks (e.g., "all golfers are ____" )** Such techniques are used when the marketer wants consumers' subjective reactions to things like brand names, colours, and advertising images.

###### Subheader: EXPERIMENTAL RESEARCH
* A final research technique involves conducting experiment, which are **used when the research wants to make cause-and-effect claims**. For example, if teh marketer has a hunch that positive consumer responses to a brand of beer are due to the newly designed label and not other factors such as the taste, brand name, or consumers' moods, an experiment might be an effective strategy to determine if this is the case. In an experiment, the researcher uses random assignment to put participants into groups or experimental conditions. This means each person has an equal chance of ending up in any of the experimental conditions. And, if random assignment to conditions (i.e., a "no label" condition, an "old label" condition, and a "new label" condition) is done properly, each group should not differ on important factors (e.g., the average age, gender breakdown, self-esteem levels, beer-drinking habits, etc. Should be similar in all three groups) before the exerpiement "treatment" is given.
* The researcher then holds everything constant across the different experimental conditions--they are all treated the same by the experimenter, they view the beer product in the same shaped bottle, they all sample one ounce of the product served at the same temperature, etc. The only difference is the key manipulation of the causal factor the researcher wants to examine. In our example, one group might view a beer bottle with no label, one groukp would view the bottle with the old label, and one group would view the bottle with the new label. If the experimenter ensures that the different experimental conditions start out being similar in nature (via random assignment) and keeps everything constant across the groups, except for the administered experimental manipulation (i.e., no label, old label, new label), then any differences across the groups can attributed to the manipulation. In an experiement, the variable that the researcher manipulates (label type) is called the independent variable. The variable that the researcher measures (in this case, taste evaluations) is called the dependent variable.

### BigHeader: TAKING IT FROM HERE: THE PLAN OF THE BOOK
* This book cover many facets of consumer behaviour, and many of the research perspectives briefly described in this chapter will be highlighted in later chapters. The plan of the book is simple: it goes from micro to macro. Think of the book as a sort of photograph album of consumer behaviour. Each chapter provides a "snapshot" of consumers, but the lens used to take each picture get picture gets successively wider.
* The book begins with issues related to the individual consumer and expands its focus until it eventaully considers the behaviours of large groups of people in their social settings. The topics to be covered correspond to the wheel of consuemr behaviour presented in Figure 1-2.
* Section 1, "Consumer in the Marketplace", provides an overview of how consumers influence marketing, and how marketers influence consuemrs in teh marketplace.
* Section 2, "Consumers as Individuals" considers the consumers at his or her most micro level. It examines how the individual receives information from his or her immediate environment and how this material is learned, stored in memory, and used to form and modify individual attitudes--both about products and about the individual.
* Section 3, "Consumers as Decision Makers", explores the ways in which consuemrs use the information they have acquired to make decisions about consumption activities.
* Section 4, "Consumers in Their Social and Cultural Settings", further expands the focus by considering how the consumer functions as a part of a larger social structure. This structure includes the influence of different social groups to which the consumer belongs and with which he or she identifies, including social class, ethnic groups, and age groups. In addition, this section will look at consumers in their broader cultural contexts.

                Figure 1-2 The wheel of Consumer Behaviour
                Section 1: Consumers in the marketplace:
                        Chapter 1: An introduction to consumer behaviour
                Section 2: Consumers as individuals
                        Chapter 2: Perception
                        Chapter 3: Learning and Memory
                        Chapter 4: Motivation and Affect
                        Chapter 5: The Self
                        Chapter 6: Personality, Lifestyle, and Values
                Section 3: Consumers as Decision Makers:
                        Chapter 7: Attitudes
                        Chapter 8: Attitude change and interactive communications
                        Chapter 9: Individual decision making
                        Chapter 10: Buying and Disposing
                Section 4: Consumers in their social and culltural settings:
                        Chapter 11: Group influence and social media
                        Chapter 12: Income, social class, and family structure
                        Chatper 13: subculture
                        Chapter 14: Cultural influence on consumer behaviour
                        Chapter 15: The creation and diffusion of culture

## REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. Provide a definition of consumer behaviour.
2. What are demographics? Give three examples of demographic characteristics.
3. Define market segmentation
4. What do we mean by an exchange.
5. What is popular culture and how does this concept relate to marketing and consumer behaviour>
6. The chapter states that "people often buy product not for what they do but for what they mean." Explain the meaning of this statement and provide an example.
7. Describe two types of relationships a consumer can have with a product.
8. What is meant by the term glboal consumer culture?
9. The economics-of-information perspective argues that advertising is important. Do you agree? Why or why not?
10. Provide two examples of important legislation that relate to Canadian consumers
11. Define social marketing and give an example of this technique
12. Define consumer addiction and give two examples
13. What is shrinkag and why is it a problem.
14. Define anticonsumption and provide two example of it
15. What is the difference between primary and secondary research approaches?
16. Describe the different types of observation appraoches used by consumer behaviour researchers
17. When would you want to use experimental research methods

## Consumer Behaviour Challenge

### Discuss
1. This chapter states that people play different roles and that their consumption behaviours may differ, depending on the particular role they are playing. State whether you agree or disagree with this perspective, giving examples from our personal life. Try to construct a "stage set" for a role you play--specify the props, costumes, and script that you use to play a role (e.g., job interviewee, conscientious student, party animal)
2. A company introduced a teddy bear for Valentine's Day called "Crazy for you." This toy aroused the ire of mental health advocates because a straitjacket restrains the cuddly bear's paws and the stuffed animal comes with institutional commitment papers. Supporters of the company's decision to keep selling the bear say opponents are too "politially correct". What do you think
3. Not-for-profit organizations routinely rely on generous corporate donations, and it's common to name facilities after benefactors. The Nationwide Children's Hospital in Ohio is no exception; its name recognizes the Nationwide insurance ompany's $50 million donation. Now the hospital is adding the Abercrombie & Fitch Emergency Department and Trauma Center, and there is also the Limited Too & Justice Main Lobby. Abercrombie & Fitch is notorious for alluring young people with its provocative advertising. The Campaign for a Commercial-Free Childhood opposes this partnership. The group's director commented that "Abercrombie & Fitch is among the worst of corporate predators. A company with such cynical disregard for children's well-being shouldn't be able to claim the mantle of healing...And personally, I find it very concerning that they named their hospital after an insurance company." What do you think? Does this cross an ethical line, or does it matter where the money comes from so long as the end result is beneficial?
4. Name some products or services that are widely used by your social group. State whether you agree or disagree with the notion that these products help to form group bonds, supporting your argument with examples from your list of products used by the group.
5. Although demographic information on large numbers of consumers is used in many marketing contexts. Some people believe that the sale of data on customers' incomes, buying habits, and so on consittues an invasion of privacy and should be stopped. Comment on this issue from both a consumer's and a marketer's point of view.
6. List the three stages in the consumption process. Describe the issues that you considered in each of these stage when you made a recent important purchase.
7. What aspects of consumer behaviour are likely to be of interest to a financial planner? To a university administrator? To a graphic arts designer? To a social worker in a government agency? To a nursing instructor?
8. Do marketers have the ability to control our desires or the power to create needs? Is this situation changing as the Internet creates new ways to interact with companies? If so, how?
9. An entrepreneur made interantional news when he set up a website to auction off the egg cells of fahsion models to the highest bidder (minimum bid: $15000). The site was targeted to people who wanted to have very attractive babies because they believe this would maximize their children's chances of succeeding in our society. Is the buying and selling of humans just another example of consumer behaviour at work? Do you agree that this service is simply a more efficient way to maximize the chance of having happy, successful children? Should this kind of marketing activity be allowed? Would you sell your eggs or sperm on a website?

## Experiential Exercises
10. To what degree will consumers trade lower prices for less privacy? Car owners can now let insurance companies monitor their driving using a new technology in exchange for lower rates. Customers who sign up for Progressive's TripSense program get a device the size of a Tic Tac box to plug into their cars. The device will track speed and how many kilometres are driven at what times of day. Every few months, customers unplug the device from the car, plug it into a computer, download the data, and send it to the company. Depending on results, discounts will range from 5 to 25 percent. In great britain, a major insurer is testing a program called Pay as You Drive. Volunteers will get a device the size of a Palm computer installed in their cars. The gadget will use global positioning satellite technology to track where the car goes, constantly sending information back to the insurance company. Cars that spend more time in safer areas will qualify for bigger discounts. Of course, the downside to these efforts is that the insurance companies may be able to collect data on where you have driven, how long you stayed in one location, and so on. Conduct a poll of ten drivers of various ages where you describe these programs and ask respondents if they would participate to receive a discount on their insurance premiums. What reasons do they give for and against the idea? Do you find any differences in attitudes based on demographic characteristics such as age or gender?
11. While you're talking to car owners, probe to see what relationship they have with their vehicles. Do these feelings correspond to the types of consumer/product attachments we discussed in this chapter? How are these relationship manifested. (Hint: see if any of  the respondents have nicknames for their cars, or if they "decorate: them with personal items)

# Chapter 2: Perception

INTRODUCTION

* Whether it's the taste of President's Choice Decadent Chocolate Chunk Cookies, the sight of a Tom Ford perfume ad, or the sound of the music group Coldplay, we live in a world overflowing with sensations. Wherever we turn, we are bombarded by a symphony of colours, sounds, and odours, Some of the "notes" in t his symphony, suchas the loud barking of a dog, the shades of the evening sky, or the heady smell of a rose bush, occur naturally. Others come from people: The people sitting next to you in class might sport tinted blond hair, bright, pink pants, and a vanilla-chocolate scent.
* Marketers certainly contribute to this commotion. Consumers are never far from advertisements, product packages, radio and TV commercials, or billboards that clamour for their attention. Each of us copes with this bombardment by paying attention to some stimuli and tuning out others. And the messages to which we do choose to pay attention often wind up differing from what the sponsors intended, as we each put our "spin" on things by taking away meaning consistent with our own unique experiences, and desires. This chapter focuses on the process of perception, in which sensations are absorbed by the consumer and used to interpret the surrounding world.
* Sensation is the immediate response of our sensory recepters (those in our eyes, ears, nose, mouth, and skin) to such basic stimuli as light, colour, and sound. Perception is the process by which these sensations are selected, organized, and interpreted. The study of perception focuses on what we add to or take away from these raw sensations as we choose which to notice and then go about assigning meaning to them.
* Most marketers would agree that, oftentimes, perception can be more influential than sensation in determining consumer preferences. Coke and Pepsi, for example, are almost identical in chemical composition and blind taste tests consistently show that most consumer don't have the sensory ability to tell the difference between a cold glass of Coke and a cold glass of Pepsi. Below a certain temperature, all we can detect is the cold, the sugar, and the sensation of the bubbles on our tongues. Thus, based on sensation alone, it is difficult to distinguish the two brands of cola. **Anecdotally, however, most of us have a very strong preference for one brand of cola over the other. This is where perception comes into play**.
* One "neuromarketing" study, using brain-scanning (fMRI) technology, found that when no brand name was presented prior to tasting cola beverage (i.e., consumers relied only on sensation), the reward centres of the brain lit up and Coke and Pepsi were equally preferred. But, when explicitly told the brand name before drinking, more consumers preferred Cola, and an entirely different part of the brain lit up--the medial prefrontal corter. This is the area of the brain responsible for thinking and judging. Culturally learned meanings about the brand influenced consumers' ultimate perceptions of Coca-Cola.
* Thus, based on sensation alone, consumers might equally prefer Pepsi and Coke. However, our ultimate preferences are also shaped by our perceptions--how we organize, interpret, and form associations about the brand.


                Figure 2-1: An overview of the Perceptual Process

                SENSORY STIMULI: Sights, Sounds, smells, tastes, textures

                ->

                SENSORY RECEPTORS: Eyes, ears, noses, mouth, skin

                -> 

                Exposure -> Attention-> Interpretation

                (From Exposure above) -> Expectations -> (To interpretation above)

### Bigheader: SENSORY SYSTEMS
* Like computers, people undergo stages of information processing in which stimuli are input and stored. Unlike computers, however, **consumers do not passively process whatever information happens to be present. Only a very small number of the stimuli in our environment are ever noticed. Of these, an even smaller number are attended to, and even these might not be processed objectively. The meaning of the stimulus is interpreted by the individual, who is influenced by his or her unique biases, needs and experiences.** As shown in Figure 2-1, three stages--exposure, attention, and interpretation--make up the process of perception. Before considering each of these stages, let's step back and consider the sensory systems that provide sensations to us in the first place.
* External stimuli, or sensory inputs, can be received on a number of channels. We may see a billboard, hear a jingle, feel the softness of a cashmere sweater, taste a new flavour of ice cream, or smell a leather jacket. The inputs picked up by our five senses consitute the raw data that generate many types of responses. For example, sensory data emanating from the external environment (hearing a song on the radio) can generate internal sensory experiences when the song on the radio triggers a young man's memory of his first dance and brings to mind the smell of his date's perfume or the fell of her hair on his cheek.

### Bigheader: SENSORY MARKETING: HARNESSING PERCEPTION FOR A COMPETITIVE ADVANTAGE
* Guests at Omni Hotels are in for a host of new, luxurious experiences. When they visit the hotel chain's website to reserve a room, they will hear the sound of soft chimes playing. On entering the lobby they'll be hit with the scent of lemongrass and green tea and iew elaborate floral displays. In their rooms they will find eucalyptus bath salts and Sensation Bars--mini bars stocked with items such as mojito-flavoured jelly beans and miniature Zen gardens. In a joint promotion with Starbucks, guests find small, scented stickers on the front pages of their free copies of USA Today--a black berry aroma suggests they start their day at the hotel with a cup of Starbucks coffee "paired with a fresh muffin."
* Welcome to the new era of **sensory marketing**, in which companies pay extra attention to the impact of sensation on our product experiences. From hotels to carmakers to brewers, companies recognize that our senses help us decide which products appeal to us--and which ones stand out from a host of similar offerings in the marketplace. In this section we'll take a closer look at how some smart marketers use our sensory systems to create a competitive advantage.

#### Header: Sight
* Marketers reply heavily on **visual elements in advertising, store design, and packaging.** Meanings are communicated on the visual channel through a product's **colouring, size, styling, brightness, and distinctiveness from competitor's products.**

###### Subheader: HOW EPRCEPTION CAN BE "COLOURED"
* Colour influence our emotions directly. Evidence suggests that some colour (particularly red) create feelings of arousal and stimulate appetite, and others (such as blue) are more relaxing. Products presented against a backdrop of blue in advertisements are better liked than those shown with a red background, and cross-cultural research indicates a consistent prefernce for blue as consumers' favourite colour when they live in Canada or Hong Kong. **People who complete tasks when the words or images are displayed on red backgrounds perform better when they have to remember details, but when blue backgrounds are used they excel at tasks that require an imaginative response.** Olympic athletes who wear red uniforms are more likely to defeat competitors in blue uniforms, and men rate women who wear red as more attractive than those who wear blue. In one study, interior designers created bars decorated primarily in red, yellow, or bluje and invited peopel to choose one  to hang out in. More people chose the yellow and red room, and these guests were more social and active--and ate more. But partygoers in the blue room stayed longer.
* Colours are rich in symbolic value and cultural meanings. For example, red represents good luck to the Chinese and is ofte nthe main color in their celebrations. Such powerful cultural meanings make colour a central aspect of many marketing strategies. Some reactions to colour come from learned associations--in Western countries black is the colour of mourning, while in some Eastern countries, notably Japan, white plays this role. In addition, the colour black is associated with power and may even have an impact on people who wear it. Teams in the National Hockey League who wear black uniforms are among the most aggressive; they consistently rank near the top of the league in penalities during the season.
* We know that perceptions of a colour depend on both its physical wavelength and how the mind responds to that stimulus. Yellow, which is in the middle of wavelengths, detectable by the human eye, is the brightest color and attracts attention. The Yellow Pages were made yellow to heighten the attention level of bored telephone operators. Further, some reactions to color are due to biological differences. Women tend to be drawn to brighter tones and are more sensitve to subtle shadings and patterns, because they see colour better than men do; men are 16 times more likely to be colour blind than women. Age also influences our response to colour. As we get older our eyes mature and our vision takes on a yello cast. Colours look duller to older people, so they prefer white and other bright tones. This helps to explain why mature consumers are much more likely to choose a white car; Lexus, which sells heavily in this market, makes 60 percent of its vehicles in white.
* The choice of colour is frequently a key issue in package design. These choices sued to be made casuaally. Today, however, colour is a serious business, and many companies realize that their colour choices can exert a big influence on consumers' assumptions about what is inside the package. When introducing a white cheese as a "sister product" to an existing blue Castello cheese, a Danish company launched it in a red package under the name of Castello Bianco. The red package was chosen to provide maximum visibility on store shelves. Ahthough taste tests were very positive, sales were disappointing. A subsequent analysis of consumer interpretations showed that the red packaging and the name gave consumers the wrong impression about the product type and its degree of sweetness. Danish consumers had trouble associating the colour red with white cheese. Also, the name Bianco connoted a sweetness that was incompatible with the actual taste of the product. It was relaunched in a white packaging and given the name White Castello. Almost immediately asles more than doubled.
* Some colour combinatinos come to te associated so strongly with a corporation that they become known as the company's trade dress, and the compnay may even be granted exclusive use of these colours. Think of Tiffany and Co. and a distinct shade of blue comes to mind, one which is trademarked by the company. As a rule, however, trade-dress protection is granted only when consumers might be confused about what they are buying because of similar coloration of a competitor's packages. Cadbury Canada recently overhauled its packaging, adding its signature purple colour and logo to all its brands. Survey results showed that while consumers know Creme Eggs and Caramilk bars as Cadbury brands, people did not associate Crispy Crunch, Crunchies, and Mr Big with Cadbury. Therefore, rebranding was necessary to associate all brands through the signature purple colour.

##### Subheader: HOW YOUR EYES MAKE YOU EAT MORE
* Our eyes play tricks on us, and these perceptions can have caloric consequences. When pouring or eating foods from larger boxes, the size of the box implicitly suggests that it's appropriate or "acceptable" to eat more--and we do! One study gave a number of moviegoers free medium-size and large-size popcorn buckets and revealed that those eating out of the large-size buckets ate 45 percent more popcorn. Even when 14-day old popcorn was used, people still ate 32 percent more from the large-size buckets even though they said they hate the popcorn. The same thing happens at parties. MBA students at a Super Bowl party were offered Chex Mix either from huge gallon-size bowls or from twice as many half-gallon bowls. Those dishing from the gallon-bowls ate 53 percent more.
* These visual illusions also influence how much we pour and drink. Take drinking glasses, for example, when we pour into a glass, we tend to focus on the height of the liquid we are pouring and not the width. if we are given two glasses that both hold 24 ounces, for example, we will tend to pour over 30 percent more into the shorter, wider glass than the taller glass, because we focus on the height and don't account for the width. Even the pros get tricked by this illusion. When 48 bartenders were asked to pour a "shot" of alcohol into either a wide tumbler or a tall highball glass, they poured 27 percent more gin, whisky, and vodka in the wide glasses than in the tall ones.
* Visual cues in packaging can also impact consumption in other ways. Take the recent trend of using smaller snack packs and 100-calorie serving sizes in teh marketplace. Although intuition tells consumers that smaller packages should help them to eat less, when multiple small packages are available consumers often eat much more of the product. In fact, it is those consumers who are most concerned with dieting and their appearance who eat the most snack foods when they are presented in small packages. Researchers find that this is becasue these consumers assume the small packages will do the job of controlling their food intake for them, so they give up their own control of watching what they eat and  they often end up eating more than one package.
* Our eyes continue to trick us even when it comes to variety. When we see an assortment of foods, like at Thanksgiving dinner or an all-you-can-eat buffet, this abundance suggests it's appropriate to eat more. College students who are given bowls of M&Ms that have ten colours of M&Ms will eat 26 percent more than those given the same-size bowls with seven colours--even though all M&Ms taste the same. Also, students given six different flavours of jellybeans took and ate 85 percent more when they were mixed up than when they were neatly organized y flavour. 
* The bottom line: When it comes to how much we eat and drink, our eyes often have more to say than our stomachs.

### Header: Smell
* We've all heard of the "Axe Effect", since we've been bombarded with commercials showing women chasing men who use Unilever's personal-care brand. Can it possibly be for real? A British researcher reported that women rated men who used Lynx deodorant (Axe's British counterpart) as more attractive than men who used a "placebo" deodorant with no fragrance. Before you run out to the store, guys, keep in mind that the women didn't actually meet the men face to face; they watched 15-second videos of the men describing themselves. The men in the video were instructed not to bath for 48 hours, and those who used the unfragranced deodorant to hide their "scent" rated themselves lower in self-confidence than di the Lynx users. A unilever consumer scientist explains, "Deodorant is supposed to make you feel good about yourself and give you confidence in the mating game, which is what Axe says."
* Important note: The Axe effect worked only for women who watched the video with no sound--those who actually heared t he men talk didn't show a preference, which supports the diea that self-confidence is translated into body language, which in turn is translated into attractiveness. As one of the researcher joked, "One way you could look at it is that the Axe Effect works as long as you're very quiet."
* Odours can stir emotions or create acalming feeling. They can evoke memories or relieve stress. Some of our responses to scents result from early associations that call up good or bad feelings, which explains why business are exploring connections between smell, memory, and mood. it has been suggested that ambient scent can influence not only moods, but consumer cognitions as well. Researchers have found pleasant scents can increase recall of brand names, particularly when the scent is combined with a visual image.
* At least to some extent, consumers' reactions to odours depend on their cultural background. There is a vast difference, from culture to culture, in how people want to smell. The Germans like to layer it on, while American men don't like to smell "sissy", despite spending more time grooming than the French or Italians. Many multinational companies adjust the scents of their products from country t o country. Even Palmolive dish detergent has a different scent in Europe than in Canada. Vidal Sassoon products sold in Asia include a pine aroma that smells like floor cleaner to Americans. 
* We process fragrance cues in the limbic system, the most primitive part of the brain and the place where we experience immediate emotions. One study even found that the scent of fresh cinnamon buns induced sexual arousal in a sample of male students! In another study, women sniffed T-shirts that men had worn for two days and reported which ones they preferred. The women were most attracted to the odour of men who are genetically similar to themselves, though not too similar. The researchers claimed the findings were evidence that we are "wired" to select compatible mates, but not those so similar as to cause inbreeding problems.
* Researchers have found that the sense of smell can also lead to different behavioural reaction to stimuli. One study found that consumers who viewed ads for either **flowers or chocolate** and who also were exposed to congruent (i.e, flowery or chocolatey, respective) odours spent more time processing the product information and were more likely to try different alternatives within the relevant product category. Other researchers have discovered that "clean" scents such as citrus-scent Windex can lead people to engage in morally "virtuous" acts such as reciprocating a favour or being willing to volunteer for a worthy cause.
* As scientists continue to discover the powerful effects of smell on behaviour, marketers are coming up with ingenious ways to exploit these connections. Ad companies spend about $80 million per year on scent marketing: **the Scent Marketing Institute** estimates that number will reach more than $500 million by 2016. Recently, marketers have leveraged the potential power of smell by using such strategies as **microcapsulating scents in direct mail communication and introducing scratch-and-sniff advertisement in newspapers.** Playing with scents can be a tricky business, however. For example, the "Got Milk" campaign got creative by releasing the scent of chocolate chip cookies in tandem with their ads on bus shelters. However, the marketers were forced to pull the scents in response to complaints by various social-interest groups: groups trying to ban all public scents, anti-obesity organizations, diabetes organizations, and advocates for the homeless who argued the smell would leave these people hungry and unable to purchase food. There is also evidence that certain smells may be more effective when targeted toward one of the sexes. A vanilla smell diffused into a women's clothing store and a spicy honey smell diffused into a men's clothing store almost doubled sales. When  the scents were reversed, sales fell to levels below what they were when no scent was infused.

#### Header: Hearing
Consumers buy millions of dollars' worth of sound recordings every year, advertising jingles maintain brand awareness, and background music creates desired moods. Many aspects of sound may affect people's feelings and behaviour. Stores and restaurant often play certain kinds of music to create a certain mood. Now even the airlines are looking to audible stimuli to help them board planes more efficiently. When Delta started to play contemporary, upbeat music during the boarding process, flight attendants reported that this seemed to encourage passengers to take their seat faster. Now Delta deliberately chooses a different song lineup each month to help "herd the cattle" and then switches to lulling melodies to help passengers relax before takeoff.
* By decomposing brand names into individual sounds called phonemes, one study showed how even these cues affect consumer evaluations and convey unique meanings about inherent properties of the product. For instance, consumers infer that brands containing the vowel sound of short [i] weigh less than brands containing the vowel sound of [a]. Other research shows that brand names with repetition in their phonetic structure (think clothing brand "bebe: and "jelly Belly" candies) produce positive affect when spoken aloud, leading to increase to preference for the brand.
* Muzak Holding estimates that its recording are heard by 80 million people every day. This so-called "functional music" is played in stores, shopping malls, and office to either relax or stimulate consumers. Research shows that workers tend to slow down during midmorning and midafternoon, so Muzak uses a system it calls "stimulus progression", in which  the tempo of its music increases during those slack times. Muzak has been linked to reductions in absenteeism among factory workers. Even the milk output of cows and egg output of chickens are claimed to increase under its influence.
* As people age, many develop aging ear, which is a loss of the ability to hear higher ferquency sounds. And some teends have figured out that their parents don't have the same range of hearing that they do. Some teens download a speical ring  tone off the Internet to alert them while they're sitting in class to incoming text messages without their teachers knowing about t hem. Ironically , this tone is a spinoff technology originally meant to repel teenagers. A Welsh security company developed what it called the "Mosquito" to help shopkeepers to disperse young people loitering in front of  their stores while leaving adults unaffected. In this case aging ear comes in handy; grownups couldn't hear the high, whining buzz that sent kids running.

### Touch
* Common observation tells us that tactile stimulation is an important sensory channel. Moods are relaxed or stimulated on the basis of sensations of the skin, whether from a luxurious massage or from the bite of a winter wind. Touch has been shown to be a factor in sales interaction. In one study, diners who were touched by waiters gave bigger tips, and food demonstrators in a supermarket who lightly touched customers had better luck getting shoppers to try a new snack product and to redeem coupons for the brand. Another study found that participants who simply touched an item (an inexpensive coffee mug) for 30 seconds or less created a greater level of attachment to the product that boosted what they were willing to pay for it. The classic contoured Coca-Cola bottle also attests to the power of touch. The bottle was designed appropriately 90 years ago to satisfy the request of a U.S bottler for a soft-drink container that people could identify even in the dark.
* Haptic (touch) senses appear to moderate the relationship between product experience and judgment confidence, confirming the common-sense notion that we're more sure about what we perceive when we can touch it. (Of course, this is a major problem for those who sell product online). These researchers found that individuals who scored high on a "need for Touch" scale were especially influenced by this dimension. Those with a high need for touch responded positively to such statements as the following:

                * When walking through stores, I can't help touching all kinds of products
                * Touching products can be fun.
                * I feel more comfortable purchasing a product after physically examining it.

* Britain's Asda grocery chain removed the wrapping from sample packages of several brands of toilet tissue in stores so that shoppers could feel and compare t extures. The result, the retailer says, was soaring sales for its own in-store brand, resulting in a 50 percent increase in shelf space for the line.
* One recent study found that product judgments by individuals who do not normally possess a compulsion to touch products (low autotelics) **are influenced by the "feel" of a package**, while those who do have a compulsion to touch items (high autotelics) do not rely on this cue to infer a product's quality. Subjects were each given a glass of water in flimsy cup that also hold a straw. Half of the subject were told to hold the cup and drink from the straw, while the other half were told to leave the cup on the desk and drink from the straw. Participants who had been identified as high autotelics rated the water the same, regardless of whether or not they touched the cup. However, low autotelics rated the water as worse if they had the opportunity to touch the cup while drinking from it. How can we explain this finding. Presumably, those who like to touch have learned over tijme that "you ca't judge a book by its cover."
* Other research finds that aspects of touch inherent in the retail setting itself might influence consumer evaluations. For example, soft carpeting leads to a greater sense of physical comfort than does hard tiling. Drawing upon this finding, researchers found that when consumers evaluated a product that was close, they use the comfort of  the carpet to compare against and judged the product less positively. However, when consumers judged a product that was moderately far away, their bodily sensations unconsciously guided their product evaluations. Thus, when at a moderate distance away, consumers perceived the product more positively when they stood on the carpet.
* The japanese take this idea of touch a step farther when they practise what they call Kansei engineering, a philosophy that translates customers' feeings into design elements. In one application of this practice, the desingers of the Mazda Miata focused on young drivers who saw the car as an extension of their bodies, a sensation they call the "horse and rider as one". After extensive research, the company discovered that making the stick shift exactly 9.5 centimetres long conveys the optimal feeling of sportiness and control.
* Similar thinking went into the driver's seat of the Chrysler 300C, which is designed to make you feel a bit taller. In auto-industry-speak, the car has a higher H-point, which refers to the location of the seated driver's hip. The change is prompted by the popularity of SUV, pickup trucks, and minivans that make drivers feel like they are riding high on the highway. Ford calls its version "Command Seating" to reinforce the power it wants drivers to feel as  they look down on all those little vehicles buzzing around below them.

### Header: Taste
* Our taste receptors obviously contribute to our experience of many products, and people form strong preferences for certain flavours.
* Specialized companies called "flavour houses" keep busy trying to develop new tastes to please the changing palates of consumers. And scientists are right behind them, developing new devices to test these flavours. Alpha MOS sells a sophisticated electronic tongue for tasting, and is working on what the company's executives call an electronic mouth, complete with artifical saliva, to chew food and disset its flavor. Coca-Cola and PepsiCo use the tongue to test the quality of corn syrups, while Bristol-Myers Squibb Company and Roche use the device to develop medicines that don't taste bitter.
* Marketers have also discovered various ways to influence consumers' perceptions of the taste of the product itself. For example, a subtle cue such as the colour of a product (e.g., a darker versus more natural colour of orange juice) can influence perceptions of the actual taste of the product, even when the true taste of the product is exactly the same! Other work finds that advertisements that refer to more than one of the senses ("Stimulate Your Senses") lead to the more positive perceptions than advertisements simply referring to taste along ("Long Lasting Flavour")

#### Header: EXPOSURE
* Exposure is the process by which the consumer comes into contact with the stimulus and has the potential to notice it. We are capable of notice stimli that we are exposed to for even a very short time--if we choose to do so. That's the reasoning behind Cadillac's ads for cars  that can go from zero to 60 miles (96 kilometres) an hour in less than five seconds. Rather than use t he traditional 30 seconds to communicate this mesage, the company ran five-second commercials to make its point.
* Before we consider what people may choose not to perceive, let's consider what they are capable of perceiving.

#### Header Sensory Thresholds
* If you have ever blown a dog whistle and watched pets respond to a sound you can not hear, you know that there are some stimuli people simply are not capable of perceiving. And, of course, some people are better able to pick up sensory information than others. The science that focuses on how the physical environment is integrated into our personal, subjective world is known as **psychophysics.

#### Header: The Absolute Threshold
* When we define t he lowest intensity of a stimulus that can be registered on a sensory channel, we speak of a threshold for that receptor. The absolute threshold refers to the minimum amount of stimulation that can be detected on a sensory channel. The sound emitted by a dog whistle is too high to be detecgted by human ears, so this stimulus is beyond our auditory threshold. The absolute threshold is an important consideration in designing marketing stimuli. **A billboard might have the most entertaining copy ever written, but this genius is wasted if the print is too small for passing motorists to see from the highway.**

#### Header: The Differential Threshold
* The **differential threshold** refers to the ability of a sensory system to detect changes in a stimulus or differences between two stimuli. The minimum change in a stimulus that can be detected is also known as the JND (just noticeable difference)
* The issue fo when and if a change will be noticed by consumers is relevant to many marketing situations. Sometimes a marketer may want to ensure that a change is noticed, such as when merchandise is offered at a discount. In other situations, the fact that a change has been made is downplayed, as in the case of price increases or when a product's size is decreased.
* A consumer's ability to detect a difference between two stimuli is relative. A whispered conversation might be unintelligible on a noisy street can suddenly become public and embarrassing knowledge in a quiet library. It is the relative difference between the decibel level of the conversation and its surroundings, rather than loudness of the conversation itself, that determines whether the stimulus will register.
* In the nineteeth century a psychophysicist named Ernst Weber found that the amount of change necessary to be noticed is systematically related to the original intensity of the stimulus. The stronger the inital stimulus, the greater the change must be for it to be noticed. This relationship is known as Weber's law.
* Consider how Weber's law works with respect to a product that has had its price descreased for a special sale. **A rule of thumb used by some retailers is  that a markdown should be at least 20 percent to make an impact on shoppers.** If so, a pair of socks that retails for $10 should be put on sale for $8 (a $2 discount). However, a sports coat selling for $100 would not benefit from a mere $2 discount; it would have to be marked down to $80 to achieve the same impact.
* The main point of Weber's law is that it is the ratios, not the absolute differences, that are important in describing the least perceptible differences in sensory discrimination. The differential threshold varies not only with consumers' sensitivity and type of stimuli, but also with the aboslute intensity of the stimuli being compared. The use of Weber's law in selling goods is important. **Manufacturers and brand managers endeavour to determine the relevant just noticeable difference for their products for two reasons: first, so that reductions in product size, increases in product price, or changes in packaging are not readily discernible to the public; and second, so taht product improvements are perceived by the public.** Unfortunately, most of the timme companies are looking t o give you less, below your JND. The package on the store shelf may register the same to your brain, but the amount inside  the package has gone down. This is how companies tend to pass on their rising costs to customers. Not only are cereal boxes slimmed down, but consumers are dealt more air in their chip bag, fewer sheets of paper towel on the roll, thinner garbage bags, and even smaller squares of toilet paper. Even Coca-Cola has reduced the size of their 355 millilitre can by 7 percent to 330 millilitres in the Hong Kong marketer to save on teh cost of aluminum.

#### Header: Subliminal Perception
* The topic of subliminal perception, t he perception of stimuli below the level of consumer consciousness, has captivated the public for more  than 50 years, despite the fact that there is virtually no proof that it has any effect on consumer behaviour. In fact, most example of subliminal perception that have been "discovered" are not subliminal at all; they are quite visible. Remember, if you can see it or hear it, it is not subliminal, because the stimulus is above the level needed for conscioss awareness! Nonetheless, the continuing controversy about subliminal persuasion has been importan in shaping the public's belief about advertising and the ability of marketers to manipulate consumers against their will.
* The public's fear of unconscious manipulation began with a widely popularized experiment that was eprformed in New Jersey drive-in movie theatre in September 1957. During a showing of the movie Picnic, a firm called the Subliminal Projection Company inserted messages that said "Drink Coca-Cola" and "Eat Popcorn" for 1/3000 second every five seconds. This rate was too fast for vieweres to be aware that they had seen the images. Supposedly, sales of popcorn increased by almost 20 percent and consumption of Coke by almost 60 percent. These claims created an uproar as journalists and social critics expressed fears that social scientists would team up with advertisers to invade privacy and control consumers against their will. As one magazine put it at the time, consumers' minds had been "broken and entered". This experiment was never replicated, and the executive responsible for the test later admitted that he had made up the results.
* Subliminal messages can supposedly be sent on both visual and aural channels. Embeds are tiny figures that are inserted into magazine advertising by using high-speed photography or airbrushing.
* In addition to these subliminal visual messages, many consumers and marketers seem to be fascinated by the possible effects of messages hidden on sound recordings. An attempt to capitalize on subliminal auditory perception techniques is found in the market for self-help cassettes. These tapes, which typically feature the sound of waves crashing or some other natural setting, supposedly contain subliminal messages to help the listener stop smoking, lose weight, gain confidence, and so on. However, there is little evidence that any subliminal stimuli transmitted on the auditory channel can bring about desired changes in behaviour. In a major study conducted to obtain a definitive answer on the effect of subliminal persuasion, groups of people were recruited to a double-blind weight loss experiment involving tapes with subaudible messages. One group had real weight loss messages in their tapes, whiile the other just listened to the ocean. After many weeks of listening to the tapes, there were no differences in weight loss between the two groups.
* Clearly, there are better ways to get our attention. Let's see how.

#### Bigheader: ATTENTION
* As you sit in a lecture, you might find your mind wandering. One minute you are concentrating on the instrutor's words, and the next you catch yourself daydreaming about the upcoming weekend. Suddenly, you tune back in as you hear your name being spoken. Fortunately, it's a false alarm--the professor has called on another student who has the same first name. But she's got your attention now!
* Attention refers to the extent to which the brain's processing activity is devoted to a particular stimulus. As you know from sitting through both interesting and "less interesting" lectures, this allocation can vary depending on the characteristics of both the stimulus (the lecture itself) and the recipient (you with your mental state at the time).
* Although we live in an information society, it's possible to have too much of a good thing. Consumers are often in a state of sensory overload; that is, they are exposed to far more information than they are able or willing to process. In our society, much of this bombardment comes from commercial sources, and the competition for our attention is increasing steadily. The average adult is exposed to about 3500 pieces of advertising information every single day--up from about 560 a day 30 years ago. Many young people in particular have developed the ability to multitask, or process information from more than one medium observed 400 people for a day and found that 96 percent of them were multitasking about a third of the time they were using media. Marketing researchers are struggling to understand this new condition, trying to figure out how to reach people doing many things at once.
* As we'll also see in later chapters, marketers are constantly searching for ways to break through the clutter and grab people's attention. For example, marketers are coming up with innovative ways to get consumers' attention in ways that go viral (i.e., the marketing message get passed along from consumer to consumer).

                * From Coca Cola: www.youtube.com/watch?v=lqT_dPApjqU
                * From Volkswagen: www.youtube.com/watch?v=R55e-uHQna0

* Marketers are also using techniques such as guerilla marketing to get noticed. This involves using communications that are unexpected and unconventional in ways that target consumers in unexpected places.

* www.adweek.com/adfreak/truly-infectious-contagion-billboard-made-bacteria-134695
* www.youtube.com/watch?v=2lXh2n0aPyw
* www.youtube.come/watch?v=Ug5OdN3QpJI
* www.youtube.com/watch?v=2lXh2n0aPyw

* However, the brain's capacity to process information is limited, and consumers are able to pay attention only to certain stimuli. The process of perceptual selectivity means that people attend to only a small portion of the stimuli to which they are exposed. Consumers practise a form of psychological economy, picking and choosing among stimuli to avoid being overwhelmed. How do they choose? Both personal and stimulus factors help.

#### Subheader: Personal Selection Factors
* Experience, which is the result of acquiring stimulation, is one factor that determines how much exposure to a particular stimulus a person accepts. Perceptual filters based on consumers' past experiences influence what they decide to process.
* Perceptual vigilance is a factor in select exposure. **Consumers are more likely to be aware of stimuli that relate to their current needs. These needs may be conscious or unconscious. A consumer who rarely notices car ads will become very much aware of them when he or she is in the market for a new car. A bus shelter ad for a faster-food restaurant that would otherwise go unnoticed becomes relevant when one waits to catch the bus close to dinner time.
* The flip side of perceptual vigilance is perceptual defence. This means that people see what they want to see--and don't see what they don't want to see. If a stimulus is treatening to us in some way, we may not process it or we may distort its meaning so that it is mroe acceptable. For example, a heavy smoker may block out images of cancer-scarred lungs because these vivid reminders hit a bit too close to home.
* Another factor affecting exposure is adaptation--that is, the degree to which consumers continue to notice a stimulus over time. The process of adaptation occurs when consumers no longer pay attention to a stimulus because it is so familiar. Almost like drug addition, a consumer can becomme "habituated" are require increasingly stronger "doses" of a stimulus for it to continue to be noticed. For example, a consumer en route to work might read a billboard message when it is first installed, but after a few days it becomes part of the passing scenery.
* Generally, several factors can lead to adaptation:

                * Intensity: Consumers become habituated to less-intense stimuli (soft sounds or dim colours) because such stimuli have less of a sensory impact.
                * Duration: stimuli that require relatively lengthy exposure to be processed tend to be habituated to because they require a long attention span.
                * Discrimination: Simple stimuli tend to be habituate to because they do not require attention to detail.
                * Exposure: people tend to habituate to frequently encountered stimuli as the rate of exposure increases.
                * Relevance: people tend to habituate to stimuli that are irrelevant or unimportant because they fail to attract attention.

#### Header: Stimulus Selection Factors
* In addition to the receiver's "mindset", characteristics of the stimulus itself play an important rol in determining what gets noticed and what gets ignored. These factors need to be understood by jmarketers who can apply them to their messages and packages to boost their chances of cutting through the clutter and commanding attention. This idea even applies to getting animals' attention. A British ad agency did a TV commercial aimed at felines that used fish and mouse images and sounds to attract catty consumers. In trials, 60 percent of cats showed some form of response to the ad, from twitching their ears to tapping the TV screen.
* In general, stimuli that differ from others around them are more likely to be noticed (remember Weber's law). This contrast can be created in several ways.
* In general, stimuli that differ from others around them are more likely to be noticed (remember Weber's law.) This contrast can be created in several ways:

        * Size: The size of the stimulus itself in contast to the competition helps to determine whether it will command attention. Readership of a magazine ad increases in proportion to the size of the ad.
        * Colour: As we've seen, colour is a powerful way to draw attention to a product or to give it a distinct identity. For example, Black & Decker has a line of tools called DeWalt targeting the residential construction industry. The line is coloured yellow and black, instead of grey which makes them stand out against other "dull" tools.
        * Position: Not surprisingly, stimuli that are in places where we're more likely to look stand a better chance of being noticed. That's why the compeition among suppliers to have their products displayed at eye level in stores is so heated. In magazines, ads that are placed toward the front of the issue, preferably on the right-hand side, also win out in the race to get readers' attention.
        * One recent study found that the noticeability of warning labels on alcoholic beverages was improved by placing the message on teh front label in a horizontal position and by reducing surrounding clutter. Another study that tracked consumers' eye movements as they scanned telephone directories also illustrates the importance of a message's position. Consumers scanned listings in alphabetical order, and they noticed 93 percent of quarter-page display ads but only 26 percent of plain listings. Their eyes were drawn to colour ads first, and these were viewed longer than black-and-white ones. In addition, subjects spent 54 percent more time viewing ads for businesses they ended up choosing, which illustrates the influence of attention on subsequent product choice.
        * novelty: Communications that use novel stimuli or appear in unexpected places tend to grab our attention. These locations include the backs of shopping carts, public washrooms, and even on other consumers themselves. An example of novelty attracting consumers' attention is Naked Grape wine produced by Vincor. Point-of-sale and advertising taglines say "It takes confidence to go unoaked". Sales have soared for this wine.

### Bigheader: INTERPRETATION
* Interpretation refers to the meanings that people assign to sensory stimuli. Just as people differ in terms of the stimuli they perceive, the eventual assignment of meanings to these stimuli varies as well. Two people can see or hear the same event, but their interpretations of it can be like night and day depending on what they had expected the stimulus to be.
* In one study, three-to-five-year-old kids who ate McDonald's french fries served in a McDonald's bag overwhelmingly thought they tasted better than those who ate the same fries out of a plain white bag. Even carrots tasted better when they came out of a McDonald's bag--more than half the kids preferred them to the same carrots served in a plain package!
* Consumers assign meaning to stimuli based on the schema, or set of beliefs, to which the stimulus is assigned. A schema provides a cognitive framework that helps organize and interpret information that surrounds a particular stimulus, such as a brand for example. A brand name can communicate expectations about product attributes and can colour consumers' perceptions of product performance by activating a relevant schema. For example, when the consumer hears the brand name "Nike", various concepts and associations may come to mind such as "athletic", "trendy", and "empowering". **Identifying and evoking the correct schema is cruicial to many marketing decisions, because this determines what criteria will be used to evaluate the product, package, or message. Nike has worked hard to distance themselves, somemthing that they received negative media attention for in the late 1980s /early 1990s. In another example, Extra-Strength Maalox Whip Antacid flopped even though a spray can is a pretty effective way to deliver the product. But to consumers, aerosol whip mean dessert toppings, not medication. In this case, the schema for aerosol containers could not accommodate such incongruent information. On the other hand, when menu items in a college cafeteria were given descriptive labels (e.g., "Traditional Cajun Red Beans with Rice" versus "Red Bean with Rice", and "Satin Chocolate Pudding" versus "Chocolate Pudding") so that diners had more informatio nabout each option and were able to better categorize them, sales increased by more than 25 percent. Thus, the effective positioning of products can often create more positive associations for consumers.

##### Subheader: Stimulus Organization
* **People do not perceive a single stimulus in isolation; they tend to view it in terms of relationships with other events, sensations, or images.** When Nabisco introduced a version of Teddy Grahams (a children's product) for adults, restrained packaging colour were used to reinforce the idea the the new product was for grownups, but sales were disappointing. The box was then changed to a bright yellow to convey the diea that this was a fun snack, and buyers' more positive association between a bright primary colour and taste led adults to start buying the cookies.
* Our brains tend to relate incoming sensations to others already in memory on the basis of some fundamental organizational principles. These principles derive from work in Gestalt psychology, a school of thought maintaining that people derive meaning from the totality of a set of stimuli rather than from any individual stimulus. The German word gestalt means, roughly, "whole", "pattern", or "configuration", a perspective best summarized by the saying "the whole is greater than the sum of its parts". A piecemeal perspective that analyzes each component of the stimulus separately will be unable to capture the total effect. The importance of a gestalt is underscored when consumers' interpretations of stimuli are affected by aesthetic, symbolic, or sensory qualities. The gestalt perspective provides several principles relating to the way stimuli are organized. 
* The gestalt principle of closure implies that consumers tend to perceive an incomplete picture as complete. That is, we tend to fill in the blanks on the basis of our prior experience. This principle explains why most of us have no trouble fillings in the blanks in an incomplete message or reading a neon sign even if one or two of its letters are burned out. The principle of closure is also at work when we hear only part of a jingle or theme. **Using the principle of closure in marketing strategies encourages audience participation, which increases the chance that people will attend to the message. Research shows that, if marketers want to encourage brand recall, they should omit an element of the advertisement that is directly linked to the brand itself.**
* The principle of similarity tells us that consumers tend to group together objects that share similar physical characteristics; that is, they group like items into sets to form an integrated whole. Green Giant relies on this principle when the company redeisgned the packaging for its line of frozen vegetables. It created a "sea-of-green" look to unify all of its different offerings.
* Another important gestalt concept is the figure-ground principle, in which one part of a stimulus will dominate (the figure) while other parts recede into the background. This concept is easy to understand if one thinks of a photograph with a clear and sharply focused object (the figure) in the centre. The figure is dominant, and the eye goes straight to it. The parts of the configuration that will be perceived as figure or ground can vary, depending on the individual consumer as well as other factors. Similarly, in marketing messages that use the figure-ground principle, a stimulus can be made the focal point of the message or merely the context that surrounds the focus.

### Bigheader: THE EYE OF THE BEHOLDER: INTERPRETATION BIASES
* The stimuli we perceive are often ambiguous; it's up to us to determine the meaning based on our past experiences, expectations, and needs. The process of "seeing what you want to see" was demonstrated in a classic experiment in which students at Princeton and Dartmouth viewed a movie of a particular rough football game between the two schools. Although everyone was exposed to the same stimulus, the degree to which students saw infractions, and the blame they assigned for those they did see, was quite different depending on which college they attended.
* As this experiement demonstrates, consumers tend to project their own desires or assumptions onto products and advertisements. Another experiment demonstrated how our assumptions influence our experiences; in this case, the study altered beer drinkers' taste preference simply by telling them different stories about a specific brew's ingredient. The researcher offered bar patrons free beer if they would participate in a taste test. Participants tasted two beers each, one a regular draft of Budweiser or Samuel Adams and the other the same beer with a few drops of balsamic vinegar added. Altough most beer aficionados would guess that vinegar makes the drink taste bad, 60 percent of the respondents who did not know which beer contained the vinegar actually preferred the doctored version to the regular one! But when tasters knew in advance which beer had vinegar in it before they took a swig only one-third preferred that version.

##### Subheader: Perceptual Positioning
* As we've seen, a product stimulus is often interpreted in light of what we already know about a product category and the characteristics of existing brands. **Perceptions of a brand comprise both its functional attributes (its features, price, etc.) and its symbolic attributes (its image and what we think it says about us when we use it).** We'll look more closely at issues such as brand image in later chapters, but for now it's important to keep in mind that our evaluation of a product is typically the result of what it means rather than what it does. This meaning, as perceived by consumers, constitutes the product's market position--and it may have more to do with our expectations of product performance as communicated by its colour, packaging, or styling than with the product itself. how does a marketer determine where a product acutally stands in the mind of consumers? **One technique is to ask them what attributes are important to them and how they feel competitors rate on these attributes.**
