# Chapter 1: Introfduction to Marketing Research

## Quirk's Market Research Media: Welcome to the World of Marketing Research
* I started at Quirk's just about the time the Internet started changing all of our lives forever and it has been fascinating to seethe marketign research industry react and adapt to all things online. Once traditional in-person focus groups and telephone and mail-based surveys were the gold standards. At first, the hue and cry was all about the Web-based methods' lack of statistical validity. While wrestleing with that issue, the industry also struggled mightily to adopt old-style paper-and-pencil-based approaches to the digital age.
* But one look at the array of tools available to researchers today will show you that the struggle was worth it. Thanks to the smartphone, myriad forms of in-the-moment research are now possible, from mobile ethnography to location-based surveys, giving marketers and researchers access to new and different types of insights. 
* Despite the outside impressino of researchers as rule-folloing introverts, obsessed with getting the numbers to line up just so, the industry is full of smart, creative, and innovative people. So while big data and do-it-yourself research tools loom as two formidable threats to the traditional marketing reseracher's job, the same adaptable, entrepreneurial spirit that enabled the transition from the pre-Internet days to the smartphone era will help current and future research professionals to keep delivering the insights to drive their organizations' strategic decisions.

### About Quirk's
* In the decades before he founded and began publishing Quirk's Marketing Research Review in 1986, Tom Quirk worked on all sides on the marketing research process as a corporate or client-side researcher and later as a research company executive. A firm beliver in the merits of marketing research, he found himself regularly having to educate potential users of marketing research services on the value of investigating consumer wants, needs, and opinions and the various techniques that could be used to do so. Ever the entrepreneur, and seeing the need for a publication that would promote the use, understanding, and value of marketing research across all industries, he created Quirk's Marketing Research Review, a monthly trade magazine for marketing research clients and the vendors that partner with them.
* Armed with a newly minted B.A. in journalism from the university of Minnesota, I inteviewed with Tom in the summer of 1988 to become the magazine's second-ever editor-in-chief. I was impressed by his enthusiasm for marketing research and, perhaps more importantly, by his insistence that the articles in Quirk's, while generally aiming to promote the value of research, should be as objective, informative, and practical as possible. His aim was to show the many ways marketing research could be used and to give readers real-world, concrete examples of how the methods could be applied.
* In the nearly 30 years since then, the staff and I have used Tom's words as a guide. From its beginnings as a monthly magazine, Quirk's Media now offers a feature-packed webiste and curates and produces marketing research-related content in a variety of forms, from e-news-letters to blogs and Webinars--all free of charge to qualified marketing research and insights professionals.

* Events in recent years have brought many changes to the world of business. As joe Rydholm points out, these changes have profoundly influenced the marketing research industry. These are exciting times in marketing research! Globalization has added real meaning to the phrase "the business world". Digital and other technological innovations have allowed us to realize the promises of the "information age" in a few short years. New technologies continue to change the competitive landscape with much greater frequency than ever before. Digital media have expanded at unprecedented rates. Widespread adoption of mobile devices and apps provides consumers with information 24 hours a day. Many objects used by people collect and send information on an ongoing basis, creating the Internet of Things (IoT). Significantly, consumers have the power, through these online innovations, to create their own information, developing consumer-generated feedback in real time.
* def: Marketing research provides managers with new information to help them make decisions.
* This new era of big data and digital media not only challenges managers to keep pace but also to understand and respond to a changing world economy. Entire countries grapple with solvency. Political revolution has changed much of the world, and continued unrest threatens more change. Businesses must anticipate what these changes will mean for their markets and capitalize on economic growth where it is occurring. Managers must determine what products to make or what services to offer, which methods of advertising are most effective, which prices will help their firm realize its target return of investment (ROI), and which distribution systemn will add the greates value to the supply chain.
* This is where marketing research becomes important. Marketing research is the process of gathering information to make better decisions. This book will help you learn the process of marketing research so that you will better understand how to use marketing research to develop actionable insights as you aim to manage in a world of unprecedented change.

## 1-1 Marketing Research is Part of Marketing
* To fully appreciate the role of marketing research, it is helpful to understand its role in and relationship to marketing. What is marketing? A short definition is "meeting needs profitably". When Apple designed the iPad, it met a growing need among those seeking greater computer portability in a table format. Amazon has been successful in creating the first generation of online book readers with its Kindle tablets.
* The Amercian Marketing Assocation offers a more detailed definition:

        Marketing is the activity, set of institutions, and processes for creating, communicating, delivering, and exchanging offerings that have value for customers, clients, partners, and society at large.

* Over recent years marketing thought has evolved to a service-centered view that a) identifies core competencies, b) identifies potential customers who can benefit from these core competencies, c) cultivates relationships with ese customers by creating value that meets their specific needs, and d) collect feedback from the market, learn from the feedback, and improves the values offered to the public. Note that this view of marketing implies that firms must be more than customer oriented (making and selling what firms think customers want and need). In addition, they must collaborate with and learn from customers, adapting to their changing needs. A second implication is that firms do no view products as separate from services. "Is General Motors really marketing a service, which just happens to include a by-product called a car?"
* our objective here is not to discuss how marketing thought is evolving but to emphasize a crucial point: To practice marketing, marketing decision makers need to make decisions. What are our core competencies? How can we use these core competencies to create value for our consumers? Who are our consumers and how can we collaborate with them? Managers have always needed information to make better decisions. In our opinion, to practice marketing well in today's environment requires access to more and better information. As you will learn, marketing research provides information to decision makers.
* The diffusion of digital media has created a culture that nurtures consumer collaboration. One important collaboration method is crowdsourcing. **Crowdsourcing** is the practice of obtaining services or ideas by asking for assistance from a large group of people, genreally online communities. Crowdsourcing via digital media is one of many tools for marketing research. 
* When firms make the right decisions, they produce products and services that their target markets perceive as having value. That value translates inso sales, profits, and a positive ROI. However, we see many failures in the marketplace. Consultants John Schneider and Julie hall state that they regularly hear from entrepreneurs and brand managers who beleive they have come up with a revolutionary product. But Schneider and hall state that these entrepreneurs almost never have done the research to confirm their grand expections. As an example, the firm CellZones thought it had the answer to cell phone privacy in libraries, restaurants and so on by creating soundproof boots for private cell phone use. Had the company done the right research and noticed that people were using their new smartphones to text rather than talk, managers may have realize that talking in private waas not a pressing need for consumers.
* In many examples of failed products and services, managers could have avoided the associated losses if they have conducted proper marketing research. Many product extensions--include McPizza, Colgate food entrees. BIC underwear, Coors spring water, and Harley Davidson perfume. Negative reactions from consumers were responsible for removing the Ken doll's earring and take Burger King Satisfires off the market. Could these failures have been avoided with better research information.

## THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE MARKETIN CONCEPT GUIDES MANAGERS' DECISIONS
* A philosophy may be thought of as a system of values or principles by which you live. Your values or principles are important because they dictate what you do each day. This is why philosophies are so important; your philosophy affects your day-to-day decisions. For example, you may provide the knowledge and understanding I will need in the world to enable me to enjoy the standard of living I desire. Assuming this does reflect your philosophy regarding higher education, consider what you do from day to day. you are going to class, listening to your professors, taking notes, reading this book, and preparing for tests. If you did not share the philosophy we just described, you would likely be doing something entirely different.
* The same connection between philosophy and action holds true for business managers. One of the most important philosophies managers have is that which determines how they view their company's role in terms of what it provides the market. Some managers have a philosophy that "we make and sell product X'. A quick review of marketing industry will tell us this philosohpy is known as product orientation. Another philosophy, known as sales orientation, is illustrated by the following statement: "To be successful we must set high sales quotas, and sell, sell, sell!" Managers who guide their companies by either of these philosohpy may guide them right out of business. A much more effective philosohpy--the marketing concept--is defined here by prominent marketing professor Philip Kotler:

                * The **marketing concpet** is a business philosohpy that holds that the key to achieving organizational goals consists of the company being more effective than competitors in creating, delivering, and communicating customer value to its chosen target markets.
                * For many years, business leaders have recognized that this is the "right" philosophy. Although the term marketing concept is often used interchangeeably with other terms, such as "customer orientation" or "market-driven" the key point is that this philosophy puts the consumer first.
                * What does all this mean? It means that having the right philosohpy is an important first step in being successful. However, appreciatring the importance of satisfying consumer watns and needs is not enough. Firms must also put toegether the "right" strategy.

## THE "RIGHT" MARKETING STRATEGY
* Strategy is another name of planning. Firms have strategies in many areas other than marketing. Financial strategy, production strategy, and technology strategy, for example, may be key components of a firm's overall strategic plan. Here, we focus on marketing strategy. How do we define marketing strategy?

                * A **marketing strategy** consists of selecting a segment of the market as the company's target market and designing the proper "mix" of products/service, price, promotion, and distribution system to meet the wants and needs of the consumers within the target market.

* **Because we have adopted the marketing concept, we can not compe up with just any strategy. We have to develop the "right" strategy--the strategy that allows our firms to truly meet the wants and needs of the consumers within the market segment we have chosen. Think of the many questions we now must answer. What is the market, and how do we segment it? What are the wants and needs of each segment, and what is the size of each segment? Who are our competitors, and how are they already meeting the wants and needs of consumers? Which is the best price? Which promotional method will be the most efficient? how should we distribute the product/service? All these questions msut be answered to develop the "right" strategy.** To make the right decisions, managers must have objective, accurate, and timely information.
* It is equally important to understand that today's strategy may be work tomorrow because, as we noted at the beginning of this chapter, there is unprecedented change going on in the buiness environment. What new strategies will be needed in tomorrow's world? As environment chnage, business decisions must be revised on an ongoing basis to produce the right strategy for the new environment.
* To practice marketing, to implement the marketing concept, and to make the decisions necessary to create the right marketing strategy, managers need information. Now you should see how marketing research is part of marketing; marketing research supplies managers with the information to help them make better decisions.

## 1-2 What is Marketing Research
* now that we have established the managers need information to carry out the marketing process, we need to define marketing research.

                * Marketing research is the process of designing, gathering, analyzing, and reporting information that may be used to solve a specific marketing problem.

* Thus, marketing research is defined as a process that reports information that can be used to solve a marketing problem, **such as determining price or identifying the most effective advertising media. The focus then is on a process that results in information that will be used to make decisions.** Notice also that our definition refers to information that may be used to solve a specific marketing problem. We will undercore the importance of specificity later in this chapter. Ours is not the only definition of marketing research. The American Marketing Association (AMA) formed a committee several years ago to establish a definition of marketing research:

                * Marketing research is the function that links the consumer, customer, and public to the marketer through information--informaiton used to identify and define marketing opportunities and problems; generate, refine, and evaluate marketing actions; monitor marketing performance; and improve the understanding of marketing as a process.

* Eahc of these definition is correct. Our definition is shorter and illustrate the process ofmarketing research. The AMA's definition is longer because it elaborates on the function as well as the uses of marketing research. In following sections, we will talk more about the function and uses of marketing research.

## IS IT MARKETING RESEARCH OR MARKET RESEARCH?
* Some people differentitate between marketing research and market research. Marketing research is defined the way we and the AMA have defined it in previous paragraphs. In fact, the Marketing Research Association (MRA defines t his term similarly as a process used by business to collect, analyze, and interpret informaiton used to make sound business decisions and successfully manage the business. **In comparison, some define market research as a subset of marketing research, using this term to refer to applying marketing research to a specific market area.** The MRA defines market reserach as a process used to define the size, location, and/or makeup of the market for a product or service. Having made this distinction, we recognize that many practitioners, publications, organizations, serving the industry, and academics use the two terms interchangeably.

## THE FUNCITON OF MARKETING RESEARCH
* The AMA definition states that the funciton of marketing research is to link the consumer to the marketer by providing information that can be used in making marketing decisions. Note that the AMA definition distinguishes between consumers and customers. The committee intended this differentiation between retail (or B2C) consumers and business (or B2B) customers. Some believe that having the link to the consumer by marketing reserach is more important today than ever. having that link with consumers is crucial if fimrs are to provide them with the value they expect in the marketplace. Thanks to globalization, online shopping, and social media, consumers today have more choices, more information, and more power to speak to others in the market than ever before.

## 1-3 What Are the Use of Marketing Research
* The AMA definition also spells out the different uses of marketing research. The three uses are 1) identifying market opportunities and problems, 2) generating, refining, and evaluating potential market actions, and 3) monitoring marketing performance. We explain each of these further in the following sections.

### IDENTIFYING MARKET OPPORTUNITY AND PROBLMS
The first of these uses is the identification of market opportunities and problems. It is not easy to determine what opportunities are in the market. Although we can think of new product or service ideas, which ones are actually feasible? Which ideas can we accomplish, and which will mostly likely generate a good ROI? Often, after someone has found an opportunity by creating a highly successful product or service, managers ask, "Why didn't we see that opportunity?" Some marketing research studies are designed to find out what consumers' problems are and to assess the suitability of different proposed methods of resolving those problems. High gasoline prices and concerns about fossil emissions bothered consumers, so Toyota developed the Prius. Consumers wanted increasingly large TV screens to hang on their walls, so Samsung developed an ultra-thin, LED, large-screen TV, Consumers who did not have cable wanted to be able to buy HBO, so HBO develoepd HBO show.
* You would think that managers would alyways know what their problems are. Why would problem identification be a use of marketing research? Problems are not always easy to identify. **Managers are more likely to always know the symptoms (sales are down, market share is falling), but determining the cause of the symptoms sometimes requires research. The identifcaiton of opportunities and problems is discussed in Chapter 3.**

### GENERATING, REFINING, AND EVALUATING POTENTIAL MARKETING ACTIONS
* Marketing research can also be used t o generate, refine, and evaluate a potential marketing action. Here "actions" may be thought of as strategies, campaigns, programs, or tactics. General Mills acquired Annie's Homegrown, an organic food company, in 2014 to meet a growing demand by consumers to have access to organic and natural foods. **"Action" of General Mills included generating the basic strategy to meet consumers' growing desire for organic foods, refining the Annie's brand by identifying ways to promote Annie's established products and develop new product that are consistent with teh brand culture, and evaluating plans to market and grow the Annie's brand.** Management can use marketing research to make better decisions for any and all of these actions.
* We can think of "actions" as strategies, and strategies involve selecting a target market and designing a marketing mix to satisfy the wants and needs of that target market. **Marketing research is conducted in a variety of areas, including determining target markets and conducting product research, pricing research, promotion research, and distribution research.**

##### Selecting Target Markets
*  A great deal of marketing research is conducted to determine the size of various market segments. Not only are managers **interested in knowing the size of the market segment that wants an all-electric vehicle but also they want to know if that segment is growing or shrinking and how well competitors are fulfilling the wants and needs of that segment. If research shows that a significantly large segment of the market hass identifiable needs, the segment is growing; if its needs are either not being met or being met poorly by competition, this segment becomes an ideal candidate for a target market.** Now the company must determine how well its core competencies will allow it to satisfy that segment's demand. Nissan very likely looked at the automobile market segments in terms of the number of miles driven in a day (we will consider this factor in Chapter 5 on secondary data). The company must have found a sizable segment that drives under 90 miles a day, because that is the range of its all-electric car, the Leaf.


##### Product Research
* Successful companies are constantly looking for new products and services. They know the lesson of the product life cycle: Products will eventually die. As a result, they must have a process in place to identify and test new products. Testing may begin with idea generation and continues with concept tests that allow firms to quickly and inexpensively get consumers' reactions to the concept of a proposed new product. Research studies are conducted on the proposed brand names and package designs of products before commercialization. Maritz Research conducts a New Vehicle Customer Study. The company has colelcted data over several years, and in recent years it has studied hybrids. Its market analysts know why drivers purchase hybrids, what makes them satisfied, what their expectation are for gas mileage and preferences for alternative fuels.

##### Pricing Research 
When a revolutionary new product is created, marketers use research to determine the "value" consumers perceive in the new product. When cable TV was introduced, research was conducted to give the early cable providers some clue as to what people would be willing to pay for clear reception and a few additional channels. When cellular phones were introduced, much research was conducted to see what people would be willing to pay for (what was then) a revolutionary "portable" telephone. Marketing research is also conducted to determine how consumers will react to different types of pricing tactics such as "buy one, get one free" versus a "one-half off" price offer. Using qualitative research in the form of asking potential buyers a series of open-ended questions--a qualitative research technique called "purchase story research"--a researcher found that the way a firm categorized its products negatively affected how B2B buyers had to use their purchase accounts. When items were recategorized, sales went up.

##### Promotion Research
* As firms spend dollars on promotion, they want to know how effective those expenditures are for the advertising, sales force, publicity/PR, and promotional offers. Firms also conduct research on the effectiveness of different media. Is online advertising more cost-effective than traditional media such as TV, radio, newspaper, and magazine advertising? As an example of promotion research, Chobani launched a campaign, called "The Break You Make", in 2015 to increase awareness of the Chobani Flip, an afternoon snack yogurt. Research determined that the promotion was very successful, with sales of Chobani Flip up 300% over the previous year. As a result Chobani extended and expanded the campaign.

##### Distribution Research
* What are the best channels to get our product to consumers? Where are the best dealers for our product, and how can we evaluate the service they provide? How satisfied are our dealers? Are our dealers motivated? Should we use multichannel distribution? How many distributors should we have? These are but a few of the crucial questions managers may answer through marketing research.

### MONITORING MARKETING PERFORMANCE
* Control is a basic function of management. To assess performance on some variables, marketing research is often used. Sales information by SKU (stock-keeping unit) and by type of distribution, for example, is often gathered through tracking data collected at point-of-sale terminals as consumer packaged goods are scanned in grocery stores, mass merchandisers, and convenience stores. **Scanner data allow managers to monitor their brands' sales as well as sales of competitors--and thus to monitor their market shares as well.** Firms use marketing research to monitor other variables such as their employees' and customers' satisfaction levels. For example, the research firm MSR Group conducted a rolling tracking study measuring drivers of bank customer satisfaction. The nationwide study allows banks to identify factors that determine advocates and loyal, at-risk, and critical customer relationships. Research firms such as the Nielsen Corporation and IRI monitor the performance of products in supermarkets and other retail outlets. They track how many units of these products are sold, through which chains, at what retail price, and so on. You will learn more about tracking studies in Chapter 5. Tracking social media, which has grown quickly the world over, is another means of monitoring market performance. Research firms have developed services that monitor what people are saying about companies, brands, and competitors. 

### IMPROVING MARKETING AS A PROCESS
* Improving our understanding of the marketing process entails conducting research to expand our knowledge of marketing. Typical of such basic research would be attemps to define and classify marketing phenomena and to develop theories that describe, explain, and predict marketing phenomena. Marketing professors at colleges and universities and other not-for-profit organizations, such as the Marketing Science Institute, often conduct basic research and publish their results in journals such as the *Journal of Marketing Research* or the *Journal of Marketing*.
* The aim of **basic rsearch** is **to expand our knowledge rather than to solve a specific problem.** For example, research published in the Journal of Marketing Research may investigate the psychological process consumers go through in deciding how long to wait for a service to be provided. This research is not conducted for any specific company problem but rather to increase our understanding of how to satisfy conumsers of services. However, this basic research could be valuable to AT&T if the company were conducting an analysis of consumer reactions to different wait times in its stores, which may be a specific problem facing AT&T. Research conducted to solve specific problems is called **applied research**, which represents the vast majority of marketing research studies. For the most part, marketing research firms are conducting research to solve a specific problem facing a company. We will revisit the idea that marketing research solves specific problems a little later in this chapter.

### MARKETING RESEARCH IS SOMETIMES WRONG
* Marketing research does not always provide management with the right answer. General motors, for example, did research on what was to become the minivan--a small van that would be suitable for families--but the research did not convince the carmaker to produce a van. Shortly thereafter, Chrysler introduced the Dodge Caravan and Plymouth Voyager minivans, which turned out to be among the most successful models in automotive history. A beer ad in the United Kingdom was deemed by marketing research to inadequate, but management dsiagreed. When the ad ran, it was very successful. The marketing research on the pilot of Seinfeld indicated the TV show would be a flop. Six months later, a manager questioned the accurarcy of the research and gave the show another try. Seinfeld became on of the most successful shows in television history. When Duncan Hines introduced its line of soft cookies, marketing research studies showed that 80% of customers who tried Soft Batch cookies stated they would buy them in the future. They didn't.
* Anyone who observes the marketplace will see products and services introduced and then taken off the market because they do not live up to expectations. Some of these failures are brought to market without any research, which increases their probability of failure. However, as we have learned, even when products are brought to market with the benefit of marketing research, the predictions are not always accurate, but this does not mean that marketing research is not useful. Remember, most marketing research studies are trying to understand and predict consumer behaviour, which is a difficult task. The fact that the marketing research industry has been around for many years and is growing means that it has passed the toughest of all tests to prove its worth--the test of the marketplace. if the industry did not provide value, it would cease to exist. For each of the failed examples cited previously, there are tens of thousands of success stories supporting the use of marketing research.

## 1-4 The Marketing Information System
* managers have recognize the importance of information as an asset to be managed for many years. The advent of computer technology in the 1960s allowed the dream of information management to become a reality. During the decades since, sophisticated management information systems have evolved that attempted to put the right information at the right time in the right format into the hands of those who must make decisions. Management information systems typically have subsystems to provide the information necessary for a functional area within an organization. Such subsystems are the accounting information system, financial information system, production information system, human resources information system, and marketing information system. Thus far, we have presented marketing research as if it were the only source of information. This is not the case, as you will understand by reading this section on marketing information systems.
* Marketing decision makers have a number of sources of information available to them. We can understand these different information sources by examining the components of the **marketing information system (MIS)**. An MIS is a structure consisting of people, equipment, and procedures to gather, sort, analyze, evaluate, and distribute needed, timely, and accurate information to marketing decision makers. The role of the MIS is to determine decision makers' information needs, acquire the needed information, and distribute that information to the decision makers in a form and a time when they can use it for decision making. This sounds very much like what we have been saying about marketing research--providing information to aid in decision making. Learning the components of an MIS will help to establish some distinctions.

### COMPONENTS OF AN MIS
* As noted previously, the MIS is designed to assess managers' information needs, to gather this information, and to distribute the information to the marketing managers who need to make decisions. Information is gathered and analyzed by the four subsystems of the MIS: internal reports, marketing intelligence, marketing decision support, and marketing research. We discuss each of these subsystems next.

##### Internal Reports System
* **Much information is generated in normal, daily transactions. When you make a purchase at a grocery store, management has a record of the SKUs you purchased, payment method, coupons or special promotions used, store location, and day of week and time of day. When that same grocery store orders supplies of foods, it has a purchase requisition and a shipping invoice from the supplier firm that ships the goods. Once all these forms of data are gathered, they serve as a source of information for managers.** The **internal reports system** gathers information generated within a firm, **including orders, billing, receivables, inventory levels, stockouts, and so on. In many cases, the internal reports system is called the accounting information system. **Although this system produces financial statements (balance sheets and income statements, etc.) that generally contain insufficient detail for many marketing decisions, the internal reports system is a source of extreme detail on both revenues and costs that can be invalable in making decisions. Other information is also collected, such as inventory records, sales call records, and orders. A good internal reports system can tell a manager a great deal of information about what has happened in the past. When information is needed from sources outside the firm, marketing researchers must call on other MIS components.

##### Marketing Intelligence System 
* The **marketing intelligence system** is defined as a set of developments in the environment. Consequently, the intelligence system focuses on bring in information generated outside the firm. Such systems include both informal and formal information-gathering procedures. Informal information-gathering procedures involve activities such as scanning newspapers, magazines, and trade publications. Staff members assigned the specific task of looking for anything that seems pertinent to the company or industry may conduct formal information-gathering activities. They then edit and disseminate this information to the appropriate members or company departments. Formerly knowns as "clipping bureaus" (because they clip), several online information service companies, such as Lexis-nexis, providing marketing intelligence. To use its service a firm would enter key terms into search forms provided online by Lexis-nexis. Information containing the search terms appears on the subscriber's computer screen as often as several times a day. By clicking on an article title, subscribers can view a full-text version of the article. In this way, marketing intelligence goes on continuously and searches a broad range of inforamtion sources to bring pertinent information to decision makers.

##### Marketing Decision Support System (DSS) 
* The third component of an MIS is the decision support system. A **marketing decision support system (DSS)** is defined as collected data that may be accessed and analyzed using tools and techniques that assist managers in decision making. Once companies collect large amounts of information, they store this information in huge databases that, when accessed with decision-making tools and techniques (such as break-even analysis, regression models, and linear programming), allowing companies to ask "what if" questions. Answers to these questions are then immediately available for decision making. For example, salespersons complete daily activity reports showing customers they called on during the day and orders written. These reports are uploaded to the company databases routinely. A sales manager can access these reports and, using spreadsheet analysis, he or she can quickly determine which salesperson are at, above, or below quota for that day of the month.

##### Marketing Research System
* Marketing research, which we have already discussed and defined, is the fourth component of an MIS. Now that you have been introduced to three other components of an MIS, we are ready to address a new question: If marketing research and an MIS are both designed to provide information for decision makers, how are the two different? In answering this question, we must see how marketing research differs from the other three MIS components.
* First, the **marketing research system** gathers information not gathered by the other MIS component subsystems: Marketing research studies are conducted for a specific situation facing the company. It is unlikely that other components of an MIS have generated the particular information needed for the specific situation. When Walmart was designing Walmart To Go, the retailer's online service that offers delivery or pick-up services in select markets, management had several service options available to offer customers. Could managers get information about what today's shopper will most prefer from the internal reports system? No. Could they get useful inforamtion from their intelligence system? No. Could they get information from their DSS? Not really. Marketing research can provide information to help Walmart understand what grocery delivery and pick-up services wil lbe most appealing to today's consumers.
* To consider another example, when People magazine wants to know which of three cover stories it should use for this week's publication, can its managers obtain that inforamtion from internal reports? No. From the intelligence system or the DSS? No. Filling this information gap is how marketing research plays a unique role in a firm's total information system. By providing information for a specific problem, marketing research provides information not provided by other components of the MIS. This is why marketing research studies are sometimes referred to as "ad hoc studies". Ad hoc is Latin for "with respect to a specific purpose". (Recall that earlier in the chapter when we defined marketing research, we said we would revisit the word specific. Now you see why used that word in our definition).
* A final characteristic of marketing research differentiates it from the other MIS components. Although this difference does not justify the existence of marketing research in the MIS, it is notable. Marketing research projects, unlike the other components, are not continuous--they have a beginning and an end. This is why marketing research studies are sometimes referred to as "projects". The other components are available for use on an ongoing basis. However, marketing research projects are launched only when there is a justifiable need for information that is not available from internal reports, intelligence, or the DSS.

## Review Questions/Applications
1. What is marketing? What is the relationship of marketing research to marketing?
2. Why is it important for decision makers to have philosophies? What is the marketing concept adn what is its relationship to marketing research?
3. What is a marketing strategy, and why is marketing research important to strategy makers?
4. Define marketing research. What is the difference between marketing research and market research?
5. What is the function of marketing research?
6. name four major uses of marketing research. Provide one example of each of the uses.
7. Which use of marketing research is considered basic research?
8. Give your own eaxmple to illustrate a marketing research study that may be used in a improving marketing as a process, b) moniotring marketing performance, c) generating potential marketing actions, and d) identifying market opportunities and problems.
9. how would you distinguish between product and market-driven orientation? Which approach is more likely to be influenced by market research and why?
10. Distinguish among MIS (marketing information system), marketing research, and DSS (decision support system).
11. Why must modern marketers collaborate and learn from their consumers? What has increased and opportunities for marketers to collaborate with them?
12. Go online and search for leading marketing research companies. Look through their websites and blog sections. Identify and give examples of some case studies of their work mentioned on the blog.
13. A business is planning to expand internationally. They intend to gradually replace the existing arrangements and set up new offices and channel with distributors in the international market. Suggest what information the company's management would need to take these decisions. how can they gather and evaluate the necessary information? Will the information needs change from country to country?
14. In the following situations, what component of the marketing information system would a manager use to find the necessary information?
        a. A manager of an electic utilities firm hears a frient at lucn talk about a new breakthrough in solar panel technology she read about in a science publication.
        b. A manager wants to know how many units of three different products in the company sold udring each month for the past three years.
        c. A manager wants to estimate the contribution to company return on investment earned by 10 different products in the company product line
        d. A manager is considering producing a new type of health food. He would like to know if consumers are likely to purchase the new food, at which meal they would most likely to eat the food, and how they would prefer the food to be packaged.


###### Active Learning: use Google Alerts to Create your Own intelligence System
* You can create your own intelligence system through Google, which offers a free service called Google Alerts (https://www.google.com/alerts). By entering key words, you will receive emails from Google Alerts whenever something appears with those key words. you can specify searching everything that appears on the Internet on limit results to search only blogs, videos, or books. What value would this be to you? If you have a paper to write for the end of term, this service will allow you to gather information all term as it occurs. Or, if you have an interview coming up, you may want to track the latest information about the company or industry. you will receive email results daily.

## CASE 1.1: Anderson Construction
* Larry Anderson is president of Anderson Construction. The firm had been in business for almost five years when the housing industry crashed with the Wall Street debacle of 2008. Although Anderson had quickly become profitable in the building business, it was a time when nearly everyone in construction was making profits, as the industry had been overinflated by a boom based on banking fees rather than real demand. To make a reputation, the company had invested heavily in the selection of a superior construction crew. Larry had followed a strategy of hiring only personnel with high levels of training and experience. This had given him the ability to be versatile. His well-experienced staff of employees gave him the ability to take on a variety of construction projects. By 2012, Anderson was one of the few firms left in town. Most construction firms had gone out of business trying to wait out the housing bust. Anderson had remained afloated with a few good employees and very limited demand among a few individuals who were interested in building custom homes. Because Larry had invested in his personnel with better pay and continuous training, he had many former employees who stayed in touch with him. These employees were eager to go back to work for Anderson and were biding their time in one or more part-time jobs.
* Larry was not accustomed to doing marketing research. Starting his business at the time of an artificial building boom, he had what seemed like an endless supply of job opportunities on which to bid. The only research Larry had conducted during those formative years was exploration to find key personnel and to keep up with building materials and building code changes. Now, as Larry had only two custom-home jobs in the queue, he began to worry about how he could find more work for his construction crews. he wondered if marketing research would be of any help.
1. Explain why you think Larry should or should not look into doing marketing research.
2. In thinking about the components of a marketing information system, which components would you suggest Larry use and why?

## CASE 1.2: INTEGRATED CASE: Auto Concepts
* Nick Thomas is the CEO of Auto Concepts, a new division of one of the largest U.S. automobile manufacturers with multiple divisions representing several auto and truck brands. This company has been slowly losing market share to other competitors. Auto Concepts was created to develop totally new models that are more in tuen with today's changing automobile market. A primary consideration in this development effort is the U.S Department of Energy's Clean Cities Initiative that advocates the use of alternative automobile fuels such as propane, natural gas, biodiesel, electric, hybrid, and/or ethanol. At the same time, management believes that the Internet of Things (IoT) with its capabilities of safe mobile connections, self- or assisted-driving, infotainment, on-board diagnostics, and more will be a prominent part of future vehicles.
* Nick Thomas knows he must come up with some innovations in automobile design and engineering, but he is not certain in which direction he should guide his division. Nick realizes that he needs to find out what consuemrs attitudes are toward fueld prices and global warming. This knowledge will help him determine a direction for the company in terms of automobile design. nick also needs more data on consumer preferences. Will they want to stay with today's standard compacts or hybrids, or might they be interested in radically different models that promise much higher fuel economies?
1. In the development of new automobile models, which of the following should Nick be primarily concerned with and why?
        a. Engineering and production feasiblity
        b. The brand image of his division's parent U.S. automobile manufacturer
        c. Technological innovation
        d. Consumer preferences
2. Should Nick use marketing research

# Chapter 2: The marketing Research Industry

## University of Georgia Terry College of Business: The Master of Marketing Research program
* Charlotte Mason, Marketing Department Head and MMR Program Director; C. Herman and Mary Virginia Terry Chair of business Administration; Director, Coca-Cola Center of Marketing Studies.
* Fast-changing customer needs have caused companies to realize they must constantly be in touch with their customers. Further, the explosion of available consumer data has led businesses to develop and improve their capabilities to turn data into business actions. Businesses turn to the marketing research function, sometimes called consumer insights, to accomplish these goals. Consequently, those in the marketing research profession find that it is rewarding and fascinating as well as highly valued.
* In the current business environment, U.S. news & World Report reports that the Bureau of Labour Statistics predicts a 31.6% employment increase between 2012 and 2022 resulting in 131,500 new marketing research job openings.
* The Univeristy of Georgia's (UGA) Terry College of Business welcomed its first Master of Marketing Research (MMR) class in 1980. The MMR program was the first of its kind in the United States and is internationally regarded as the standard of comparison for such programs. Acknowledging the need for high-caliber marketing researchers, UGA faculty and leading marketing professionals have joined forces to develop a curriculum to prepare students for careers in marketing research. The coursework is designed to provide students with technical skills as well as an understanding of strategic marketing issues from both the client and supplier sides of the industry.

* The industry has evolved with 

page 49