# Journey_to_marketing

DISCLAIMER: This repo contains copyrighted material the use of which has not always been specifically authorized by the copyright owner. In accord with the purpose of notetaking/search/retrieval in an easy way and convenient way, we are making such material available to advance understanding of marketing. We believe this constitute a "fair use" of any such copyrighted material as provided in Section 107 of the US Copyright Law. In accordance with Title 17 U.S.C Section 107, the material on this site is distributed without profit to those who have expressed a prior intereste in receiving the included information for research and educational purposes. For further information on fair use, go to https://www.law.cornell.edu/uscode/text/17/107
If you wish to use copyrighted material from this site for purposes of your own that go beyond fair use, you must obtain permission from the copyright owner.

* Innovator
* Early Adopter
* Early Majority 
* Late Majority 
* Laggard

* The point of greatest peril in the development of a high-tech market lies in making the transition from an early market dominated by a few visionary customers to a mainstream market dominated by a large block of customers who are predominantly pragmatists in orientation
* marketing has long known how to exploit fads and how to develop trends. The problem, since these techniques are antithetical to each other, is that you need to decide which one--fad or trend--you are telling with before you start. It would be much better if you could start with a fad, exploit it for all it was worth and then turn it into a trend.
* Every truly innovativ high-tech product starts out as a fad--something with no known market value or purpose but with "great properties" that generate a lot of enthusiam within an "in crowd" of early adopters. That's the early market. Then comes a period during which the rest of the world watches to see if anything can be made of this; that is the chasm. If in fact something does come out of it--if a value proposition is discovered that can be predictably delivered to a targetable set of customers at a reasonable price--then a new mainstream market segment forms, typically with a rapidity that allows its inital leaders to become very, very successful. The key in all this is crossing the chasm--performing the acts that allow the first shoots of that mainstream market to emerge. This is a do-or-die proposition for high-tech enterprises; hence it is logical that they be the crucible in which "chasm theory" is formed.
* One of the most important lessons about crossing the chasm is that the task ultimately requires achieving an unusual degree of company unity during the crossing period. This is a time when one should forgo the quest for eccentric marketing genius in favor of achieving an informed consensus among mere mortals. It is a time not for dashing and expensive gestures but rather for careful plans and cautiously rationed resources--a time not to gamble all on some brilliant coup but rather to focus everyone on pursuing a high probability course of action and making as few mistakes as possible.
* The endorsement of innovators becomes an important tool for developing a credible pitch to the early adopters, that of the early adopters to the early majority, and so on
* early majority comprises about one-third of the total buying population in any given segment
* from a market development perspective laggards are generally regarded as not worth pursuing on any other basis.
* The idea is to keep this process moving smoothly, progressing something like the passing of a baton in a relay race or like Tarzan making his way across the jungle swinging from vine to well-placed vine
* It is important to maintain momentum in order to create a bandwagon effect that makes it natural for the next group to want to buy in. Too much of a delay and the effect would be something like hanging from a motionless vine--nowhere to go but down. (Actually, going down is the graceful alternative. What happens more often is a desperate attempt to re-create momentum, typically through some highly visible form of promotion, which ends up making th company look like Tarzan frantically jerking back and forth, trying to get a vine moving with no leverage. This typically leads the other animals in the jungle just to sit and wait for him to fall)
* There is an additional motive for maintaining momentum: to keep ahead of the next emerging technology
* Thereby losing the advantage exclusive to a technology
* What the early adopter is buying,is some kind of change agent. By being the first to implement this change in their industry, the early adopters expect to get a jump on the competition, whether from lower product costs, faster time to market, more complete customer service, or some other comparable business advantage. They expect radical discontinuity between the old  ways and the new, and they are prepared to champion this cause against entrenched resistance.
* By contrast, the early majority want to buy a productivity improvement for existing operations. They are looking to minimize the discontinuity with the old ways. They want to evolution, but revolution. They want technology to enhance, not overthrow, the established ways of doing business. And above all, they do not want to debug somebody else's product. By the time they adopt it, they want it to work properly and to integrate appropriately with their existing technology base.
* Early adopters do not make good references for the early majority. And because of the early majority's concern not to disrupt their organizations, good references are critical to their buying decisions. So what we have here is a catch-22. The only suitable reference for an early majority customer, it turns out, is another member of the early majority, but no upstanding member of the early majority will buy without first having consulted with several suitable references.
* What happens in this catch-22 situation. First, because the product has caught on with the early adopters, it has garnered a lot of publicity. Yet not one has achieve to date mainstream market status, despite the fact that the current offers actually do work reasonably well. In large this is because of the high degree of discontinuity implicit in their adoption by organizations, and the inability of the marketing effort, to date, to lower this barrier to the early majority. So the product languish, continuing to feed off the early adopter segment of the market, but unable to really take off and break through to the high-volume opportunities.
* In sum, when promoter o high-tech products try to make the transition from a market base made up of visionary early adopter to penetrate the next adoption segmnet, the pragmatist early majortiy, they are effectively operating without a reference base and without a support base within a market that is highly reference oriented and highly support oriented.
* What the company staff interpreted as a ramp in sales leading smoothly "up the curve" was in fact an inital blip--what we will be calling the early market--and not the first indications of an emerging mainstream market. The company failed because its manaagers were unable to recognize that there is something fundamentally different between a sale to an early adopter and a sale to the early majority, even when the company name on the check reads the same. Thus, at a time of greatest peril, when the company was just entering the chasm, its leaders held high expectaion rather than modest ones, and spent heavily in expansion projects rather than husbanding resources.

### Definition of marketing 
* definition of marketing: taking actions to create, grow, maintain, or defend markets
* a set of actual or potential customers, for a given set of products or services, who have a common set of needs or wants, who reference each otehr when making a buying decision
* this is different from a category, like an oscilloscope market. It stands for the aggregate sales, both past and projected, for oscilloscope. In this way, you are leaving yourself open to misinterpreting the data badly. Most important, market, when it is defined in this sense, ceases to be a single, isolable object of action--it no longer refers to any single entity that can be acted on --and can not, therefore, be the focus of marketing
* The way around this problem for many marketing professionals is to break up the category into isolable "market segment"
* marketing professional insist on market segmentation because they know that no meaningful marketing program an be implemented across a set of customers who do not reference each other. The reason for this is simply leverage. No company can afford to pay for every marketing contact made. Every program must rely on some ongoing chain-reaction effects--what is usually called word of mouth. The more self-referencing the market and the more tightly bounded its communications channels, the greater the opportunity for such effects.

## Early Market
* Visionaries dominate the buying decision in this market, but it is the technology enthusiasts who are first to realize the potential in the new product.
* Innovator: They are the ones who will spend hours trying to get products to work that, in all conscience, never should have been shipped in the first place. 
* Innovators make great critics because they truly care
* In business, technology enthusiasts are the gatekeepers for any new technology. They are the ones who have the interest to learn about it and the ones everyone else deems competent to do the early evaluation. As such, they are the first key to any high-tech marketing effort.
* As a buying population, or as key influencers in corporate buying decisions, technology enthusiasts pose fewer requirements than any other group in the adoption profile--but you must not ignore the issues that are important to them. First an most crucially, they want the truth, and without any tricks. Second, wherever possible, whenever they have a technical problem, they want access to the most technically knowledgeable person to answer it. Third, they want to be first to get the new stuff. By working with them under nondisclosure--a commitment to which they typically adhere scrupulously--you can get great feedback early in the design cycle and begin building a supporter who will influence buyers not only in his own company but elsewhere in the marketplace as well. Finally, they want everything cheap.
* In large companies, technology enthusiasts can most often be found in the advanced technology group, or some such congregation, chartered with keeping the company abreast of the latest developments in high tech. There they are empowered to buy one of almost anything, simply to explore its properties and examine its usefulness to the corporation. In smaller companies, which do not have such budgetary luxuries, the technology enthusiast may well be the "designated techie" in the IT group or a member of a product design team who either will specify your product for inclusion into the overall system or supply it to the rest of the team as a technology aid or tool
* To reach technology enthusiasts, you need to place your message in one of their various haunts--on the Web, of course. Direct response advertising works well with this group, as they are the segment most likely to send for literature, or a free demo, a webinar, or whatever else of substance you offer. Just don't waste your omney on a lot of fancy image advertising-they read all that as marketing hype. Direct email will reach them--and provided it is factual and new information, they read cover to cover 
* In sum, technology enthusiasts are easy to do business with, provided you 1. have the latest and greatest technology, and 2. don't need to make much money. For any innovation, they will always be a small class of these enthusiasts who will want to try it out just to see if it works. That said, for the most part, these people are not powerful enough to dictate the buying decisions of others, nor do they represent a significant market in themsevles. What they represent instead is a sounding board for initial product or service features and a test bed for introducing modifications to the product or service until it is thoroughly "debugged"
* Enthusiasts are like kindling: They help start the fire. They need to be cherished for that. The way to cherish them is to let them in on the secret, to let them play with the product and give you their feedback, and wherever appropriate, to implement the improvements they suggest and to let them know that you implemented them
* The other key to work with enthusiasts toward a successful marketing campaign is to find the ones who have access to the big boss. Big bosses are people who can dictate purchases and who do represent a significant marketing opportunity in and of themselves. To get more specific about the kind of big boss we are looking for, let us now turn to the next group in the Technology Adoption Life Cycle, the early adopters, or as they are often called in the high-tech industry, the visionaries.

#### Early Adopters: The Visionaries 
* Visionaries are that rare breed of people who have the insight to match up an emerging technology to a strategic opportunity, the temperament to translate that insight into a high-visibility, high-risk project, and the charisma to get the rest of their organization to buy into that project. They are the early adopters of high-tech products. Often working with budgets in the multiple millions of dollars, they represent a hidden source of venture capital that funds high-technology business
* As a class, visionaries tend to be recent entrants to the executive ranks, highly motivated, and driven by a "dream". The core of the dream is a business goal, not a technology goal, and it involves taking a quantum leap forward in how business is conducted in their industry or by their customers. It also involves a high degree of personal recognition and reward. Understand their dream, and you will understand how to market to them.
* To give additional examples specific to high tech, when Harry MaMahon at Merrill Lynch committed to put ten thousand people on Salesforce.com's cloud-based sales force automation system at a time when that vendor had no other large enterprise customer, he was acting as a visionary. When Linda Dillman at Walmart committed to install Symbol RFID systems to create real-time visibility into all the inventory in every Walmart store, she was acting as a visionary. When Reed Hasting, CEO of Netflix, committed to outsource the computing for his entire business to Amazon.com's Elastic Compute Cloud, he was acting as a visionary. And when Ted McConnel at Procter&Gamble committed to direct all digital advertising worldwide via AudienceScience's ad spend management system, he was acting as a visionary. In every case, these people took significant business risks with what at the time was unproven technology and/or an unproven company in order to achieve breakthrough improvements in productivity and customer service 
* And that is the key point. Visionaries are not looking for an improvement; they are looking for a fundamental breakthrough. Technology is important only insomuch as it promises to deliver on this dream. The key point is that, in contrast with the technology enthusiast, a visionary focuses on value not from a system's technology per se but rather from the strategic leap forward such technology can enable.
* Visionaries drive the high-tech industry because they see the potential for an "order-of-magnitude" return on investment and willingly take high risks to pursue that goal. They will work with vendors who have little or no funding, with products that start life as little more than a diagram on a whiteboard, and with technology gurus who bear a disconcerting resemblance to Rasputin. They know they are going outside the mainstream, and they accept that as part of the price you pay when trying to leapfrog the competition.
* Because they see such vast potential for the technology they have in mind, they are the least price-sensitive of any segment of the technology adoption profile. They typically have budgets that let them allocate generous amounts toward the implemntation of a strategic initiative. This means they can usually provide up-front money to seed additional development that support their project--hence their importance as a source of high-tech development capital.
* Finally, beyond fueling the industry with dollars, visionaries are also effective at alerting the business community to pertinent technology advances. Outgoing and ambitious as a group, they are usually more than willing to serve as highly visible references, thereby drawing the attention of the business press and additional customers to small fledgling enterprises.
* As a buying group, visionaries are easy to sell but very hard to please. This is because they are buying a dream that, to some degree, will always be a dream. The "incarnation" of this dream will require the melding of numerous technologies, many of which will be immature or even nonexistent at the beginning of the project. The odds against everything falling into place without a hitch are astronomical. Nonetheless, both the buyer and the seller can build successfully on two key principles. First, visionaries like a project orientation. They want to start out with a pilot project, which makes sense because they are "going where no man has gone before", and you are going there with them. This is followed by more project work, conducted in phases, with milestones, and the like. The visionaries' idea is to be able to stay very close to the development train to make sure it is going in the right direction and to be able to get off if they discover it is not going where they though. While reasonable from the customer's point of view, this project orientation is usually at odds with the intentions of entrepreneurial vendors who are trying to create a more universally applicable product around which they can build a multi-customer business. This is potentially a lose-lose situation threatening both the quality of the vendor's work and the fabric of the relationship, and it requires careful account management including frequent contact at the executive level. The winning strategy is built around the entrepreneur being able to "productize" the deliverables from each phase of the visionary project. That is, whereas for the visionary the deliverables of phase one are only of marginal interest--proof of concept with some productivity improvement gained, but not "the vision"--these same deliverables, repackaged, can be a whole product to someone with less ambitious goal. For example, a company might be developing a comprehensive object-oriented software toolkit, capable of building systems that could model the entire workings of a manufacturing plant, thereby creating an order-of-magnitude improvement in scheduling and processing efficiency. The first deliverable of the toolkit might be a model of just one milling machine's operations and its environment. The visionary looks at that model as a milestone. But the vendor of that milling machine might look at the same model as a very desirable product extension and want to license it with only modest alternations. It is important, therefore, in creating the phases of the visionary's project to build in milestones that lend themselves to this sort of product spin-off.
* The other key quality of visionaries is that they are in a hurry. They see the future in terms of windows of opportunity, and they see those windows closing. As a result. they tend to exert deadline pressures--the carrot of a big payment or the stick of a penalty clause--to drive the project faster. This plays into the classic weaknesses of entrepreneurs--lust after the big score and overconfidence in their ability to execute within any given time frame. Here again, account management and executive restraint are crucial. The goal should be to package each of the phases such that each phase: 1. is accomplishable by mere mortals working in earth time; 2. provides the vendor with a marketable product; 3. provides the customer with a concrete return on investment that can be celebrated as a major step forward. 
* The last point is crucial. Getting closure with visionaries is next to impossible. Expectation derived from dreams simply can not be met. This is not to devalue the dream, for without it there would be no directing force to drive progress of any sort. What is important is to celebrate continually the tangible and partial both as useful things in their own right and as heralds of the new order to come.
* The most important principle stemming from all this is the emphasis on management of expectations. Because controlling expectation is so crucial, the only practical way to do business with visionaries is through a small, top-level direct sales force. At the front end of the sales cycle, you need such a group to understand the visionaries' goals and give them confidence that yourcompany can step up to them. In the middle of the sales cycle, you need to be extremely flexible about commitments as you begin to adapt to the visionaries' agenda. At the end, you need to be very careful in negotiations, keeping the spark of the vision alive without committing to tasks that are unachievable within the time frame alloted. All this implies a mature and sophisticated representative working on your behalf. 
* In terms of prospecting for visionaries, they are not likely to have a particular job title, except that, to be truly useful, they must have achieved at least a senior vice presidential level in order to have the clout to fund their visions. In fact, in terms of communications, typically you don't find them, they find you. The way they find you, interestingly enough, is by maintaining relationships with technology enthusiasts. That is one of the reasons why it is so important to capture the technology enthusiast segment.
* In sum, visionaries represent an opportunity early in a product's life cycle to generate a burst of revenue and gain exceptional visibility. The opportunity comes with a price tag--a highly demanding customer who will seek to influence your company's priorities directly and a high-risk project that could end in disappointment for all. But without this boost many high-tech product can not make it to market, unable to gain the visibility they need within their window of opportunity, or unable to sustain their financial obligations while waiting for their marketplace to develop more slowly. Visionaries are the ones who give high-tech companies their first big break. it is hard to plan for them in marketing programs, but it is even harder to plan without them.
* the dynamics of early markets: To get an early market started requires an entrepreneurial copany with a breakthrough technology product that enables a new and compelling application, a technology enthusiast who can evaluate and appreciate the superiority of the product over current alternatives, and a well-heeled visionary who can foresee an order-of-magnitude improvement from implementing the new application. When the market is unfolding as it should, the entrepreneurial company seeds the technology enthusiast community with early copies of its product while at the same time sharing its vision with the visionary executives. If then invites the visionary executives to check wit the technology enthusiast of their choice to verify that the vision is indeed achievable. Out of these conversations comes a series of negotiations in which, for what seems like a very large amount of money at the time, but which will later be recognized as just the tip of the iceberg, the technology enthusiasts get to buy more toys than they have ever dreamed of, the entrepreneurial company commits itself to product modifications and system integration services it never intended to, and the visionary has what on paper looks to be an achievable project, but which is in fact a highly improbably dream. That's when the market unfolds as it should. That is the good scenario--good because, although it is rife with problems, they are ones that will get solved one way or another, and some level of valu will be achieved all around. There are numerous other scenarios where the early market does not even get a proper start. Here are some of them: 
* First problem: the company simply has no expertise in bringing a product to market. It raises insufficient capital for the effort, hires inexperienced sales and marketing people, tries to sell the product through an inappropriate channel of distribution, promotes in the wrong places and in the wrong ways, and in general fouls things up. Remedying this kind of situation is not as hard as it may seem, proving the participants in the company are still communicating and cooperating with each other, and everyone is willing to scale back their expectation several notches. The basis for reform is the principle that wining at marketing more often than not means being the biggest fish in the pond. *If we are very small, then we must search out a very small pond, a target market segment that fits our size. To qualify as a "real pond", as we also noted before, its members must be aware of themselves as a group, that is, it must constitute a self-referencing market segment, so that when we establish a leadership position with some of its members, they will get the word out--quickly and economically--to the rest.* Of course, no single pond of a size we can dominate in the short term is large enough to provide a sustaining market for the long term. Sooner or later, we have to expand into adjacent pond. Or, to shift the metaphor, we need to reframe our tactics in the context of a "bowling pin" strategy, where one targets a given segment not just because one can "knock it over" but because, in so doing, it will help knock over the next target segment, and thus lead to market expansion. With the right kind of angle of attack, it is amazing how large and fast the chain reaction can be. So one is never necessarily out of the gam,e even when things are pretty bleak.
* Second problem: The company sells the visionary before it has the product. This is a version of the famous vaporware problem, based on preannouncing and premarketing a product that still has significant development hurdles to overcome. At best, the entrepreneurial company secures a few pilot projects, but as schedules continue to slip, the visionary's position in the organization weakens, and support for the project is eventually withdrawn, despite a lot of customized work, with no usable customer refernce gained. Caugh in this situation, the entreprenuerial company has only one adequate response, a truly unhappy one: shut down its marketing efforts, admit its mistakes to its investors, and focus all its energies into turning its pilot projects into something useful, first in terms of a deliverable to the customer, and ultimately in terms of a marketable product. Example: artificial intelligence company tries to give brick-and-mortar retailer the same kind of visibility into in-store traffic that e-tailers were getting from their clickstreams on the web. New management comes around by counting people at the beginning and later incorporates addtional camera technology and analytics to branch out further into security and inventory protection applications as well--all on the back of a prudently managed business that is cash-flow positive. To be sure, the company did lose its inital market window, but the good news is, the latest developments in retail and e-commerce are creating a second window to exploit.
* problem number three: marketing falls prey to the crack between the technology enthusiast and the visionary by failing to discover, or at least failing to articulate, the compelling application that provides the order-of-magnitude leap in benefits. A number of companies buy the product to test it out, but it never gets incorporated into a major system rollout, because the rewards never quite measure up to the risks. The resulting lack of revenue leads to folding the effort, either by shutting it down entirely or selling it for the technology assets to another enterprise. The corrective response here begins with reevaluating what we have. If it is not, in fact a breakthrough product, then it is never going to create an early market. But perhaps it could serve as a supplementary product in an existing mainstream market. If that is indeed the case, then the right response is to swallow our pride, reduce our financial expectaions, and subordinate ourselves to an existing mainstream-market company, which can put our product in play through its existing channels. Example: CA technology was built up almost entirely on this principle of remarketing other comapneis' often cast-off products. Alternatively, if we truly have a breakthrough product but we are stalled in getting the early market moving, then we have to step down from the lofty theoretical plateau on which we have established that this product can be part of any number of exciting applications and get very practical about focusing on one application, making sure that it is indeed a compelling one for at least one visionary who is already familiar with us, and then committing to that visionary, in return for his or her support, to removing every obstacle to getting that application adopted.
* The biggest problem is typically overly ambitious expectation combined with undercapitalization

#### Mainstream market

#### Early Majority: The Pragmatists 
* The big money is in the hands of more prudent souls, who do not want to be pioneers, who never volunteer to be an early test site, and who have learned the hard way the "leading edge" of technology is all too often the "bleeding edge"
* In the realm of high tech, pragmatist CEOs are not common, and those there are, true to their type, tend to keep a relatively low profile. Low on drama, high on integrity and commitment. They tend to be best known by their closest colleagues, from whom they typically have earned the highest respect, and by their peers within their industry, where they show up near the top of the leaderboard year after year.
* Of course, to market successfully to pragmatists, one does not have to be one--just understand their values and work to serve them. To look more closely into their values, if the goal of visionaries is to take a quantum leap forward, the goal of pragmatists is to make a percentage improvement--incremental, measurable, predictable progress. If they are installing a new product, they want to know how other people have fared with it. The word risk is a negative one in their vocabulary--it does not connote opporunities or excitement but rather the chance to waste money and time. They will undertake risks when required, but they first will put in place safety nets and manage the risks very closely.
* If pragmatists are hard to win over, they are loyal once won, often enforcing a company standard that requires the purchase of your product, and only your product, for a given requirement. This focus on standardization is, well, pragmatic, in that it simplifies internal service demands. But the secondary effects of this standardization on your gorwth and profitability--increasing sales volumes and lowering the cost of sales--is dramatic. Hence the importance of pragmatists as a market segment
* Example: The most celebrated example and beneficiary of this effect in the last decade of the twentieth century was microsoft. It created dominant market positions in desktop operating system, office automation, and departmental servers, such that a decade later the enterprise landscape looked very homogeneous. At the same time, however, as each of these markets was developing enterprise IT as a category also supported a variety of second-tier vendors, and each of these vendors was also able to carve out its own pragmatist enclave of its own. 
* When pragmitists buy, they care about the company they are buying from, the quality of the product they are buying, the infrastructure of supporting products and system interfaces, and the reliability of the service they are going to get. In other words, they are planning on living with this decision personally for a long time to come. (By contrast, the visionaries are more likely to be planning on implementing the great new order and then using that as a springboard to their next great new order and then using that as a springboard to their next great career step upward). Because pramatists are in it for the long haul, and because they control the bulk of the dollars in the marketplace, the rewards for building relationship of trust with them are very much worth the effort.
* Pragmatists tend to be "vertically" oriented, meaning they communicate more with others like themselves within their own industry than do technology enthusiasts and early adopters, who are more likely to communicate "horizontally" across industry boundaries in search of kindred spirits. *This means it is very tough to break into a new industry selling to pragmatists* References and relationships are very important to these people, and there is a kind of catch-22 operating: pragmatists won't buy from you. Obviously, this works to the disadvantage of startup and, conversely, to the great advantage of companies with established track records. On the other hand, once a startup has earned its spurs with the pragmatist buyers within a given vertical market, they tend to be very loyal to it, and even go out of their way to help it succeed. 
* There is no one distribution channel preferred by pragmatists, but they do want to keep the sum total of their distribution relationships to a minimum. This allows them to maximize their buying leverage and maintain a few clear points of control should anything go wrong. In some cases this prejudice can be overcome if the pragmatist buyer knows a particular salesperson from a previous relationship. As a rule, however, the path into the pragmatist community is smoother if a smaller entrepreneurial vendor can develop an alliance with one of the already accepted vendors or if it can establish a value-added-reseller sales base. VARs, if they truly specialize in the pragmatist's particular industry, and if they have a reputation for delivering quality work on time and within budget, represent an extremely attractive type of solution to a pragmatist. They can provide a "turnkey" answer to a problem, without impacting internal resources already overloaded with the burdens of ongoing system maintenance. What the pragmatist likes best about VARs is that they represent a single point of control, a single company to call if anything goes wrong.
* One final characteristic of pragmatist buyers is taht they like to see competition--in part to get costs down, in part to have the security of more than one alternative to fall back on should anything go wrong, and in part to assure themselves they are buying from a proven market leader. This last point si crucial: Pragmatists want to buy from proven market leaders because they know that third parties will design supporting products around a market-leading product. That is, market-leading products create an aftermarket that other vendors service. This radically reduces pragmatist customers' burden of support. By contrast, if they mistakenly choose a product that does not become the market leader, but rather one of the also-rans, then this highly valued aftermarket support does not develop, and they will be stuck making all the enhancements by themselves. Market leadership is crucial, therefore, to winning pragmatist customers.
* Pragmatist are reasonably price-sensitive. Thy are willing to pay a modest premium for top quality or special service, but in the absence of any special differentiation, they want the best deal. That's because, having typically made a career commitment to their job and/or their company, they get measured year in and year out on what their operation has spent versus what it has returned to the corporation.
* *Overall, to market to pramatists, you must be patient. You need to be conversant with the issues that dominate their particular business. You need to show up at the industry-specific conferences and trade shows they attend. You need to be mentioned in articles that run in the newsletters and blogs they read. You need to be installed in other companies in their industry. You need to have developed applications for your product that are specific to their industry. You need to have partnerships and alliances with the other vendors who serve their industry. You need to have earned a reputation for quality and service. In short, you need to make yourself over into the obvious supplier of choice. This is a long-term agenda, requiring careful pacing, recurrent investment, and a mature management team. One of its biggest payoffs, on the other hand, is that it not only delivers the pragmatist element of Technology Adoption Life Cycle but tees up the conservative element as well*

#### Late Majority: The Conservative 
* A conservatives represent approximately one-third of the total available customers within any given Technology Adoption Life Cycle.
* As a marketable segment, however, they are rarely developed as profitable as they could be, largely because high-tech companies are not, as a rule, in sympathy with them.
* Conservatives, in essence, are against discontinuous innovation.
* To be sure, eventually conservatives do succumb to the new paradigm just to stay on par with the rest of the world。 But just because they use such products doesn't mean they have to like them.
* The truth is, conservatives often fear high tech a little bit. Therefore, they tend to invest only at the end of a technology life cycle, when products are extremely mature, market-share competition is driving low prices, and the products themselves can be treated as commodities.
* If high-tech business are going to be successful over the long term, they must learn to break this vicious circle and establish a reasonable basis for conservatives to want to do business with them. They must understand that conservatives do not have high aspirations about their high-tech investments and hence will not support high price margins.
* Conservatives like to buy preassembled packages, with everything bundled, at a heavily discounted price. The last thing they want to hear is that the software they just bought doesn't support the home network they have installed. The product they understand best are those dedicated to a single function--music, video, email, games. The notion that a single device could do all four of these functions does not excite them--instead, it is something they find vaguely nauseating.
* The conservative marketplace provides a great opportunity, in this regard, to take low-cost, trailing0edge technology components and repackage them into single-function system for specific business needs. The quality of the package should be quite high because there is nothing in it that has not already been thoroughly debugged. The price should be quite low because all the R&D has long since been amortized, and every bit of the manufacturing learning curve has been taken advantage of. It is, in short, not just a pure marketing ploy but a true solution for a new class of customer.
* There are two keys to success here. The first is to have thoroughly thought through the "whole solution" to a particular target end-user market's needs, and to have provided for every element of that solution within the package. This is critical because there is no profit margin to support an after-purchase support system. The other key is to have lined up a low-overhead distribution channel that can get this package to the target effectively. In this context, the rise of "as-a-service" offering delivered over the Web creates a magnificent opportunity to make progress with this segment
* Conservatives represent a major opportunity for the high-tech industry in taht they greatly extend the market for high-tech offers that are no longer state-of-the-art. 
* *The key is to focus on convenience rather than performance, user experience rather than feature sets.*

#### The dynamics of Mainstream Markets
* Just as the visionaries drive the development of the early market, so do the pragmatists drive the development of the mainstream market. Winning their support is not only the point of entry but the key to long-term dominance. But having done so, you can not take the market for granted.
* To maintain leadership in a mainstream market, you must at least keep pace with the competition. At this point it is no longer necessary to be the technology leader, nor is it necessary to have the very best product. But the product must be good enough, and should a competitor make a major breakthrough, you have to make at least a catch-up response.
* the key to making a smooth transition from the pragmatist to the conservative market segments is to maintain a strong relationship with the former, always giving them an open door to go to the new paradignm, while still keeping the latter happy by adding value to the old infrastructure. It is a balancing act to say the least, but properly managed, the earning potential in loyal mature market segments is very high indeed.
* The importance of the product itself, its unique functionality, when compared to the importance of the ancillary services to the customer, is at its highest with the technology enthusiast, and at its lowest with the conservative. This is no surprise, since one's level of involvement and competence with a high-tech product is a prime indicator of when one will enter the Technology Adoption Life Cycle. The key lesson is that the longer your product is in the market, the more mature it becomes, and the more important the service element is to the customer. Conservatives, in particular, are extremely service oriented.
* To get to this place, two things have to happen in coordination with one another. The first is that vendors must design out as much as possible the service demands that derive from installing and implementing their products successfully. This is service-as-a-tax, adding no value, being simply the price you have to pay to get the stuff to work. This is still extraordinarily high for enterprise IT software, and while it has created a lot of income for system integrators, it has left a bad taste in everyone's mouth, so the less of it, the better.
* By contrast, when vendors address the second goal of making the service yield an improved user experience, then there are smiles all around. The Apple iPad is a wonderful example here, for it appeals not only to technology enthusiasts and visionaries("It is just so cool"), but equally so to pragmatists('no training cost!') and to conservative("no training, period"). 

#### Laggard: The sketics
* The primary function of high-tech marketing in relation to skeptics is to neutralize their influence.

#### Back to the Chasm 
* The basic flaw in teh model, as we have said, is that it implies a smooth and continuous progression across segments over the life of a product, whereas experience teaches just the opposite. Indeed, making the marketing and communications transition between any two adoption segments is normally excruciatingly awkward because you must adopt new strategies just at the time you have become most comfortable with the old ones. The biggest problem during this transition period is the lack of a customer base that can be referenced at the time of making the transition into a new segment 
* Pramatists and conservative both like to see themselves as members of a particular industry first, businesspeople second, and purchasers of technology third. Pragmatists, however, have more confidence in technology a potential benefit and in their ability to make sound technology purchases. Conservatives are considerably more nervous about both. They are willing to go along, up to a point, with pragmatists they respect, but they are still slightly unnerved by pragmatists' overall self-confidence
* visionaries lack respect for the value of colleagues' experiences. Visionaries are teh first people in their industry segment to see the potential of the new technology. Fundamentally, they see themselves as smarter than their opposite numbers in competitive companies--and quite often they are. Indeed, it is their ability to see things first that they want to leverage into a competitive advantage. That advantage can only come about if no one else has discovered it. They do not expect, therefore, to be buying a well-tested product with an extensive list of industry references.
* Pragmatists, on the other hand, deeply value the experience of their colleagues in other companies. When they buy, they expect extensive references, and they want a good number to come from companies in their own industry segment.
* Visionaries take a great interest in technology than in their industry. Visionaries are defining the future. You meet them at technology conferences and other futurist forums. Pragmatist, on the other hand, don't put a lot of stake in futuristic things. They see themselves more in present-day terms, as the people devoted to making the wheels of their industry turn. Therefore, they tend to invest their *convention time in industry-specific forums discussing industry-specific issues. Where pragmatists are concerned, sweeping changes and global advantages may make for fine speeches, but not much else.*
* Visionaries fail to acknowledge the importance of existing product infrastructure. Visionaries are building systems from the ground up. They do not expect to find components for these systems lying around. They do not expect standards to have been established--indeed, they are planning to set new standards. They do not expect support groups to be in place, procedures to have been established, or third parties to be available to share in the workload and the responsibility. Pragmatists expect all these things. When they see visionaries forging their own paths with little or no thought of connecting with the mainstream practices in their industry, they shudder. Pragmatists have based their career on such connections. 
* Visionaries have little self-awareness about the impact of their disruptiveness. From a pragmatist's point of view, visionaries are the people who come in and soak up all the budget for their pet projects. If the project is a success, they take all the credit, while the pragmatists get stuck trying to maintain a system that is so "state-of-the-art" no one is quite sure how to keep it working. If the project fails, visionaries always seem to be a step ahead of the disaster, getting out of town while they can, and leaving the pragmatists to clean up the mess. Visionaries, successful or not, don't plan to stick around long. They see themselves on a fast track that has them leapfrogging up the corporate ladder and across corporations. Pragmatists, on the other hand, tend to be committed long term to their profession and the company at which they work. They are very cautious about grandiose schemes because they know they will have to live with the results.
* The company may be trumpeting its recent success at early test sites when what the pragmatist really wants to hear about are up-and-running production installations. Or the company may be saying "state-of-the-art" when the pragmatist want to hear "industry standard"

# D-Day Analogy
* The chasm is filled with all sorts of unpleasant folk, from disenchanted current customers to nasty competitors to unsavory investors. Their efforts conspire to tax the reserves of the fledgling enterprise seeking to pass through to the mainstream.
* To enter the mainstream market is an act of aggression. The companies who have already established relationships with your target customer will resent your intrusion and do everything they can to shut you out. The customers themselves will be suspicious of you as a new and untried player in their market. No one wants your presence. You are an invader.
* Our long-term goal is to enter and take control of a mainstream market that is currently dominated by an entrenched competitor. For our product to wrest the mainstream market from this competitor, we must assemble an invasion force comprising other products and companies. By way of entry into this market, our immediate goal is to transition from an early market base to a srategic target market segment in the mainstream. Separating us from our goal is the chasm. We are going to cross that chasm as fast as we can with an invasion force focused directly and exclusively on the point of attack. Once we force the competitor out of our targeted niche market, then we will move out to take over adjacent market segments on the way toward overall market domination.
* Cross the chasm by targeting a very specifc niche market where you can dominate from the outset, drive your competitors out of that market niche, and then use it as a base for broader operations.
* companies jsut starting out, as well as any marketing program operating with scarce resources, must operate in a tightly bound market to be competitive. Otherwise their "hot" marketing messages get diffused too quickly, the chain reaction of word-of-mouth communication dies out, and the sales force is back to selling "cold". This is a classic chasm symptom, as the entrepreneurial enterprise leaves behind the latent enthusiasm of the early market. It is usually interpreted as a letdown in the sales force or a cooling off in demand when, in fact, it is simply the consequence of trying to expand too rapidly and too broadly into too loosely bounded a market.
* The D-Day strategy prevents this mistake. It has the ability to galvanize an entire enterprise by focusing it on a highly specific goal that is 1. readily achievable and 2. capable of being directly leveraged into long-term success. Most companies fail to cross the chasm because, confronted with the immensity of opportunity represented by a mainstream market, they lose their focus, chasing every opportunity that present itself, but finding themselves unable to deliver a salable proposition to any true pragmatist buyer. The D-Day strategy keeps everyone on point--if we don't take Normandy, we don't have to worry about how we're going to take Paris. And by focusing our entire might on such a small territory, we greatly increase our odds of immediate success.
* Starting a fiew is problem that any Boy Scout or Girl Scout can solve. You lay down some bunched-up newspaper, put on some kindling and some logs, and then light the paper. Nothing could be easier. Try to cross the chasm without taking a niche market approach is like trying to light a fire without kindling. The bunched-up paper represents your promotional budget, and the log, a major market opportunity. No matter how much paper you put under that log, if you don't have any target market segments to act as kindling, sooner or later, the paper will be all used up, and the log still won't be burning. 
* General startup will think like follows: *we do not have, nor are we willing to adopt, any discipline that would ever require us to stop pursuing any sale at any time for any reason.* We are, in other words, not a market-driven company; we are a sales-driven company
* To put it simply, the consequences of being sales-driven during the chasm period are fatal. Here's why: The sole goal of the company during this stage of market development must be to secure a beachhead in a mainstream market--that is, to create a pragmatist customer base that is refernenceable, people who can, in turn, gain us access to other mainstream prospects. To capture this reference base, we must ensure that our first set of customers completely satisfy their buying objectives. To do that, we must ensure that the customer gets not just the product but what we will describe in a later chapter as the whole product--the complete set of products and services needed to achieve their desired result, the thing we promised them to get the purchase order. Whenever anything is left out from this set, the solution is incomplete, the selling promise unfulfilled, and the customer unavailable for referencing. 
* Whole product commitments, however, are expensive. Even when we recruit partners and allies to help fulfill them, they require resource-intensive management. And when the support role falls back on us, it often requires the attention of our most key people, the same people who are critical to every other project we have going. Therefore, whole product commitments must be made not only sparingly but also strategically--that is, made with a view toward leveraging them over multiple sales. This can only happen if the sales effort is focused on a single niche market. More than one, and you take on additional use cases, causing you to burn out your key resources, falter on the quality of your whole product commitment, and prolong your stay in the chasm. To be truly sales-driven is to invite a permanent stay.
* For reasons of whole product leverage alone, the sales-driven strategy should be avoided. But its siren lure is so strong that additional ammunition against it is warranted. Consider the following: One of the keys in breaking into a new market is to establish a strong word-of-mouth reputation among buyers. Numerous studies have shown that in the high-tech buying process, word of mouth is the number-one source of information that buyers reference, both at the beginning of the sales cycle, to establish their "long list", and at the end, when they are paring down their short ones. Now, for word of mouth to develop in any particular marketplace, there must be *a critical mass of informed individuals who meet from time to time, in exchanging views, reinforce the product's or the company's positioning. That's how word of mouth spreads*
* Seeding this communications process is expensive, particularly once you leave the early market, which in general can be reached through the technical press and related media. By contrast, pragmatist buyers, as we have already noted, *communicate along industry lines or through professional association*. 
* *Winning over one or two customers in each of five or ten different segments--the consequence of taking a sales-driven approach--will create no word-of-mouth effect.* Your customers many *try to start a conversation about you, but there will be no one there to reinforce it. By contrast, winning four or five customers in one segment will create the desire effect.* Thus, the segment-targeting company can expect word-of-mouth leverage early in its crossing-the-chasm marketing effort, whereas the sales-driven company will get it much later, if at all. This lack of word of mouth, in turn, makes selling the product that much harder, thereby adding to the cost and the unpredictability sales.
* Finally, there is a third compelling reason to be niche focused when crossing the chasm, which has to do with the need to achieve market leadership. Pragmatist customers want to buy from market leaders. Their motive is simple: whole products grow up around the market-leading products and not around the others. That is, there are many more mobile apps for Apple and Android mobile devices than there are for Window 8 or BlackBerry. There is a much broader base of talent to support Cisco routers and switches than Juniper's. The existence of this added value infrastructure not only enriches the value of the product but also simplifies the task of getting support, at no addtional cost to either the vendor or the customer. Pragmatists are very much aware of this effect. As a result, perhaps unconsciously but nonetheless consistently, they conspire to install some company or product as the market leader and then do everything in their power to keep them there. ONe of the main reasons they delay their buying decisions at the beginning of a marketplace--thereby creating the chasm effect--is to help them get a fix on who the leader will be. They don't want to back the wrong one.
* Now, by definition, when you are crossing the chasm, you are not a market leader. The question is, How can you accelerate achieving that state? This is a matter of simple mathematics. To be the leader in any given market, *you need the largest market share--typically over 50 percent of the new sales at the beginning of a market, although it may end up to be as little as 30-35 percent later on. So, take the sales you expect to generate over any given time period--say the next two years--double that number, and that's the size of market you can expect to dominate*
* Segment. Segment. Segment. One of the other benefits of this approach is that it leads directly to you "owning" a market. That is, you get installed by the pragmatists as the leader, and from then on, they conspire to help keep you there. This means that there are significant barriers to entry for any competitors, regardless of their size or the added features they have in theri product. Mainstream customers will, to be sure, complain about your lack of features and insist you upgrade to meet the competition. But in truth, mainstream customers like to be "owned"--it simplifies their buying decisions, improves the quality and lowers the cost of whole product owndership, and provides security that the vendor is here to stay. They demand attention, but they are on your side. As a result, an owned market can take on some of the characteristics of an annuity--a building block in good times, and a place of refuge in bad--with far more predictable revenues and far lower cost of sales than can otherwise be achieved.
* For all these reasons--for whole product leverage, for word-of-mouth effectiveness, and for perceived market leadership--it is critical that, when crossing the chasm, you focus exclusively on achieving a dominant position in one or two narrowly bounded market segments. If you do not commit fully to this goal, the odds are overwhelmingly against your ever arriving in the mainstream market.

#### Beyond Niches 
* The key to moving beyond one's initial target niche is to select strategic target market segments to begin with. That is, target a segment that, by virtue of its other connecitons, creates an entry point into one or more adjacent segments. 

#### Successful Chasm Crossing
* Software programs at the application layer are "naturally vertical" because they directly interface with end users, and end users organize themselves by geography, industry, and profession. *This markes them readily adaptable to the beachhead focus needed to cross the chasm. Later on in the life cycle, however, as solution generalize, a horizontal approach is typically more productive, but this is a much harder challenge for an application offer to meet*
* By contrast, infrastructure offering have the opposite dynamic. They are "naturally horizontal", because they interface with machines and other program where the value, in part, is providing a stable, standard interface. They do not lend themselves to vertical marketing because, as products, they do not change very much from niche to niche.
* Documentum: How could a company justify reducing its market scope from "all personnel who touch complex documents in all larget enterprises" to maybe one thousand people total on the planet? The answer is that when you are picking a chasm-crossing target it is not about the number ofpeople involved, it is about the amount of pain they are causing 
* Knocking over the head pin, taking the beachhead, crossing the chasm,. The size of the first pin is not the issue, but the economic value of the problem it fixes is. The more serious the problem, the faster the target niche will pull you out of the chasm. Once out, your opportunities to expand into other niches are immensely increased because now, having one set of pragmatist customers solidly behind you, you are much less risky for others to back as a new vendor.
* The second key is to have lined up other market segments into which you can leverage your initial niche solution. This allows you to reframe the financial gain in crossing the chasm. It is not just about the money you make from the first niche: It is the sum of that money plus the gains from all subsequent niches. It is a bowling alley estimate, not just a head pin estimate, that should drive the calculation of gain. This is a particularly important point for entrepreneurs working inside large corporations who are having to compete for funding against larger, more established market opportunities. If the executive council can not see the extended market, if they only see the first niche, they won't fund. Conversely, if you go the other way, and show them only an aggregated mass market, the end result of the market going horizontal and into hypergrowth, they will fund, but they will fire you as you fail to generate these spectacular numbers quickly. The bowling pin model allows you both to focus on the immediate market, keeping the burn rate down and the market development effort targeted, while still keeping in view the larger win.
* Salesforce.com: They did not go after a vertical market. Instead, they focused their segmentation along the following lines: 1. they target salespeople and their manager only--not customer service, not marketing; 2. They target mid-market companies, big enough to need systems to compete with market leaders in their category, small enough to be unable to afford the IT investment required; 3. They focused on the United States only, in part to stay close to the customer, in part because the United States has always been the early-adopting country in enterprise software; 4. They focused on technology savvy industries, beginning with high tech itself, then moving into telco, pharmaceuticals, and financial services. | The problem they were addressing was, quite simply, making the quarter.
* A key lesson to learn here is that you want to target a beachhead segment that is: Big enough to matter; small enough to win; good fit with your crown jewels

# From Idea to Implementation

page 102
