# Preface

* The complexity of the decision faced by Canadian marketers in today's technology-intensive, hpyer competitive global business environment is both exciting and challenging.
* The main goal of this textbook is to help students develop the skills necessary to meet these challenges by immersing them in experience in marketing decision making.
* This textbook focuses on marketing decision making and the decision maker, not just on marketing theory, concepts, and principles.
* Student pratice making and supporting real marketing decisions and learn from decisions made by others--experienced and successful international marketers in a variety of industries, companies, and context.
* The text is more strategic in focus, introducing strategic marketing concepts such as the development of market-driven strategies, positioning strategies, and sources of sustainable competitive advantage. This allows students to fully apprecitate the strategic nature and implications of their decision
* At the same time, the text focuses on decision making by taking marketing managers' perspectives and showing students how core marketing concepts, theories, and principles are used to make key marketing decisions
* It contains an organizing framwork that illustrates how all of the decisions marketers make related to each other.
* Chapter 1 (what is marketing?) introduces an organizing framework that provides students with a summary of the **marketing planning** process. We have placed a greater focus on value creation through a more detailed discussion of value creation and by using value creation as a theme throughout the text 
* The discussion of SWOT analysis in Chapter 2 (Making **Strategic Marketing** Decisions) has been enhanced
* In Chapter 3 (**Market Segmentation and Positioning**), we have put greater focus on defending positioning strategies and on developing brand personality
* In Chapter 4 (**Market Research**), we have updated the section on marketing inteligence, including updated example. We have also provided a more comprehensive discussion of **customer satisfaction** measurement and expand the discussion of interactive and online **marketing research**
* In Chapter 5 (**Consumer Buying Behavior**), we have enhanced our discussion of **brand loyalty** and the **FCB grid**. We have updated our discussion of technology with a new section on blogs and **blogging** and RSS feeds
* In Chapter 6, (**Organizational Buying Behavior**), we have provided a new section on **Customer Relationship Management** and made our discussion of the use of technology in managing these relationship more current.
* In Chapter 7 (PRoduct Strategy), we have revised the discussion of the layers of the **product concept** to be consistent with the approach most instructors expect. A discussion of **product classifications** has been added to the chapter.
* In Chatper 8 (Product Management), we have added a new section on **service strategy**.
* In Chapter 9 (Pricing Strategy), we have streamlined the presentation of the material and made it easier to read by moving more of the marketing math concepts and examples to the Chapter Appendix
* In Chapter 10 (Channels and Supply Chain Strategy), we have enhanced our discussion of channel management with new section on **motivating channel partners**. 
* In Chapter 11 (**Retailing and E-tailing**), we have updated our discussion, facts, and figures relating to e-tailing and we have added a discussion of the marketing implications of social networking sites like Youtube, MySpace, and Facebook
* In Chapter 12 (**Integrated Marketing Communication**), we have added new sections discussing Characteristics of **IMC, Database Marketing, buzz marketing, guerilla marketing, event marketing, and viral marketing**.
* In Chatper 13 (**Commmunication Mix and Tactics**), we have expanded our discussion of **Internet advertising**, added a new section of **mobile marketing and SMS**, and added a new section on **Search Engine Marketing and Search Engine Optimization**. We have also added a discussion of technology to our treatment of **personal selling**
* In Chapter 14 (**Developing and Implementing a marketing Plan**), we have provided a much more detailed discussion of **marketing planning** and how to write a marketing plan. A new sample marketing plan that follows the prescribed marketing plan outline has been included in the appendix.

### Approach and Organization
* Part 1 (Identifying and Specifying Value Opportunities) provides an overview of the world marketing (Chapter 1) and strategic marketing decision, and it introduces students to the key concepts of market segmentation and positioning (Chapter 3). These chapters help students understand the situational context, identify creative segmentation schemes, develop rich segment profiles, and evaluate the appropriateness of alternative **targeting strategies**.
* Part 2 (Understand Customer Value Needs and Behavior) provides **students with foundational tools and concepts for understanding the decision context**, **conducting industry and competitive analysis, and understanding customers**. This section includes discussion of marketing research (Chapter 4), consumer buying behavior (Chapter 5), and organizational buying behavior (Chapter 6)
* Part 3 (Creating the Value Proposition) provides students with the tools and concepts relating to **product strategies** (Chapter 7), **product management** (Chapter 8), **pricing strategy** (Chapter 9). These chapters focus on tailoring product and pricing decisions to suite the target market profile and strategic context
* Part 4 (Delivering, Communicating, and Implementing the Value) introduces students to channels and supply chain strategy (Chapter 10), retailing and e-tailing, integrated marketing commmunications, commmunications mix and tactics, and developing and implementing a marketing plan.
* Each chapter starts with a profile of a marketing decision maker who works in a position students might expectto have within a few years after graduation. A decision that the marketer has recently faced is described , and alternative courses of action are proposed. At this point, students are asked to step into the shoes of the profiled marketer, evaluate the alternatives, and recommend and defend a course of action. At the end of the chapter, we discuss what decision the marketer made and why, and provide a summary of the known consequences of that decision. We try to make it clear that the decision made by the marketer is not necessarrily the most appropriate one. Our aim is to show the rationale underpinning the decision and to help students understand how the rationale is informed by the decision maker's perspective. This format allows students to take an active role in applying the marketing concepts they are learning. We have included decision makers from a variety of organizations, ranging from large, well-known companies like Molson and IMB, to smaller regional businesses like CoastTire, to small family businesses like Yellow Point Lodge. This allows students to see how marketing issues and decisions differ across organizations, and also how they are similar. 

# Chapter 1: What is Marketing 
* Hellacopters, laura Ashley sheet, Sleep Number mattress from Sleep Country Canada, Dalia Cami pyjamas by La Vie en Rose, Amanda's trademark Magic by Celine perfume, Starbucks Verona Blend, Splenda, Yoplait from the SubZero, BlackBerry, lululemon atheletica, Monster.ca, The Globae and Mail Online, MySpace, Ann Taylor suit,  Prada shoes, Coach briefcase, Scion, iTune
* [Def] Value refer to the benefit a customer receives from buying and using a good or service in relation to the costs and sacrifices of buying and using it
* You have "market value" as a person--you have qulities that set you apart from others and abilities other people want and need. After you finish this course, you'll have even more value because you'll know about the field of marketing and how the field relates to you as a future busienss person and a consumer. Although our main focus is understanding how to make effective marketing decisions for organizations, what you learn here equally applies to "brand you" -- and hopefully you will get some ideas about what you can do to increase your value to employers, partners, and maybe even to society. You probably already knew that celebrities like Sidney Crosby, Mike Meyers and Avril Lavigne are "brands"--but so is every one else. We "position" ourselves for job interviews; we are "on the market" when we break up with a boyfriend or girlfriend; some people hire image consultant to devise a "marketing strategy" for them; while others undergo plastic surgery or makeovers to improve their "product image". So, the principles of marketing apply to you, just as they apply to coffee, cars, computers, and produce. While there are some difference in how we go about marketing each of these, the basic ideas are the same. Marketing is a fundamental part of our lies both as consumers and as business people. 

##### THE WHO AND WHERE OF MARKETING
* This book is about marketing, and more specifically about making effective marketing decisions that create value for others. 
* Marketers come from many different places. Although many have earned marketing degrees, others have all sorts of background, sometimes with formal training and sometimes without. Fashion retailers may have training in design. Advertising creative executives often have a fine arts background while copywriters often have degrees in English. E-marketer who design interactive webpages for products and companies may have studies computer science. Even accountants often end up in marketing roles, as someone needs to make marketing decisions for accounting firms.
* Marketers work in a variety of location. They work in consumer goods companies such as Mega Bloks or Black & Decker or at service companies, or the Bank of Montreal. You will see them in retail organizatinos like lululemon atheletica or Frontrunners and at companies that manufacture products for other companies like Bombardier or Nortel. You will see them in government organizations like the Canadian Tourism Commission, not-for-profit organizations like the Candian Cancer Society, large organizations like IBM Canada, and small startup like TeamPage, a website for intramural and other amateur sport teams to coordinate and communicate their activities. Sport and the arts are hotbeds of activity for marketing. A big part of these efforts involves promoting athletes like Sidney Crosby and artist like Avril Lavigne--who themselves create customer experiences
* Marketing principles are organizations work hard to convince consumers to use seat belts, engage in safe sex, not litter, not smoke, and not drink and drive. 
* No matter where they work, all marketers are real people who make decisions that affect themselves, their companies, and very often thousands if not millions of consumers or customers
* It is important to recognize that the marketing decision maker may not have made the most appropriate decision. In fact, there are no "right answers" in business and, ultimately, consumers are the only judges of whether we, as marketers, have made good decisions. What you want to practice is making and defending your decision based on appropriate analysis, application of marketing theory, concepts, and principles, and your judgment. Do not worry if you think that you might not have good judgment yet. That comes with experience and practice in making marketing decision.
* [def] The official definition of marketing adopted in 2004 by the American Marketing Association is: **marketing is an organizational function and a set of processes for creating, communicating, and delivering value to customers and for managing customer relationship in ways that benefit the organization and its stakeholder**. The basic idea of this somwhat complicated definition of marketing is that marketing is all about creating and delivering value, and doing this for all parties involved in an exchange. This involves a decision-making process, and these decisions are typically (but not always) made by people who have official marketing roles in areas of an organization such as marketing department, a sales department, a marketing communications department, or a new product development department. Another definition of marketing is: **marketing is the process of achieving individual and organizational objectives by creating superior customer value for one or more target market with a sustainable strategy.** This definition suggests that "the prime directive" of marketing is to achieve objectives. **We do that by creating superior customer value--creating offers that are perceived as being more valuable to customers than any other solutions (competing brands), or even more valuable than the money in their wallet**. [def] **Customer value** is what you get from buying and using a product relative to the costs and sacrifices you incur to do so. **To create a transaction or an economic exchange of value, both parties need to believe that the exchange is fair--that what they get is worth more to them than what they give up.** Of course each of us has our own perceptions of how to best satisfy our needs, what is valuable, and what exchanges are "worth it". One enterprising entrepreneur in England recently offered deluxe 61-step car washes for $10,000. Enough customers thought the two-week process was worth it thathe has nine months' worth of business lined up. **The challenge to the marketer is to create, price, distribute, and communicate an attrative value proposition to the customer to get the most value in return**. (EX: Pepsi-cola hopes that the product, price, distribution, and communication decisions it makes for Aquafina result in a value proposition preferred by customers). This alternative definition also focuses on the idea of creating value for specific target markets, groups of people that have different needs, wants, or preferences from other groups of people and would seek a different value proposition(solution). Not everyone would want a $10,000 car wash, but apprently some people (sheiks and billionaires) do. This definition also suggests that we want to **develop a sustainable strategy**, not in the environmental sense, but in the sense of making a set of decision that will allow us to compete effectively until our objectives have been achieved--which ofr most organizations is a long term perspective

### Marketing is About Creating Customer Value
* One important part of our definition of marketing is taht it is about creating value for **diverse stakeholders**. [def] the term stakeholders here refers to **buyers, sellers, investors in a company, community residents, and even citizens of the nations where goods and services are made or sold**. [MY]: different from stakeholder from project management, which is people who is affected or can influence the project.
* One important stakeholder is the consumer. A consumer is the ultimate user of a good or service. Consumers can be individuals or organizations (although we usually use the term "customer" when referring to an organization), whether a company, government, charity, or association. So while some like to say "the customer is king", it is important to recognize that **marketing is not just about satisfying customer needs, it is about satisfying the needs of all the parties involved in an exchange**. **The seller needs to make a profit to stay in busienss to be able to continue offering the goods and services valued by the customer**. Similarly, a not-for-profit organization needs to match its supply of resources with custommer demand. This is the philosophy behind the marketing concept. The marketing concept suggests **organizational objectives such as long-term profitability are best met by first understanding what customers need (value sought) and then determining the associated costs of satisfying those needs (creating and delivering that value)--thus creating exchanges of mutual satisfaction.** Central to the philosophy reflected in the marketing concept is **an understanding that organizations exist to create value for consumers where it is neither efficient nor effective for consumers to attempt to satisfy their needs themselves.
* [def] **a need is the difference between a consumer's actual state and some ideal or desired state.** When the difference is big enough, the consumer is motivated to take action to satisfy the need. When you are hungry, you buy a snack. If you're not happy with your hair, you get a new look. **Needs are related to phsical conditions, such as being cold, hungry, or scared, and psychological conditions such as being liked, commmunicating with others, or being fulfilled**. The specific way a need is satisfied depends on an individual's history, learning experiences, and cultural environment. [def] **a want is a desire for a particular product used to satisfy a need in specific ways that are cultural and socially influenced** for example, two classmates' stomatchs runble during  a noon-hour class, and both need food. How each of them satisfies this need may be quite different. One might crave a salad or a bag of trail mix to go. The other might buy a cheeseburger and fries. On the want may be even more specific. I want Mountain Country Yogurt Trail Mix or a McDonald's cheeseburger. **Consumers are motivated by needs, but make purchase decisions based on wants.**
* **A product delivers a benefit when it satisfies a need or want.** **For marketers to be successful, they must develop products that provide one or more benefits**. **The challenge is to identify what benefits people look for, develop a product that delivers those benefits, and then convince buyers that it does so better than a competitor's product**. **As the management expert Peter Drucker worte, "The aim of marketing is to make selling superfluous**. **What Drucker means is if we succeed in creating a product that meets the needs of the customer, he or she will happily buy it without any "persuasion" from a salesperson. The salesperson may still be required to make the customer aware of the product and its relative merits in them--and typically less about the particular features or funcitons that deliver those benefits.** You buy a cordless drill because you care about the ease of making holes (the benefit). You may buy a particular brand of cordless drill because of differences in particular features that enable some drills to deliver the core benefit better than others.
* Everyone can want your product, but they doesn't ensure sales unless they have the means to obtain it. When you couple desire with the buying power or resources to satisfy a want, the result is **demand**. So, the potential customers for a snappy, red BMW convertible are the people who want the car minus those who can't afford to buy or lease one. **A market consists of all the consumers who share a common need that can be satisfied by a product purchase and who have the resources, willingness, and authority to make the purchase**.
* A marketplace used to be a location where buying and selling occurred face to face. The marketplace may still be a street corner or an open air market, but in today's "wired" world, buyers and sellers might not ever see each other. Increasingly the modern marketplace takes the form of a **glitzy shopping mall, a mail-order catalogue, a television shopping network, a eBay auction site, or an e-commerce website**.

### Marketing is About Exchange Relationships
* **At the heart of every marketing act--big or small--is something we refer to as an "exchange relationship"**. An exchange occurs when something is obtained for something else in return. **The buyer receives an object, service, or idea that satisfies a need and the seller receives something he or she believes is of equivalent economic value.** Usually this is money, but it could be other goods or services. Almost anything of value can be exchanged--including, **your time, your ideas, and the thing you can do**. Politicians exchange **promises for votes**, athletes and performers **exchange performances for ticket sales and exchange their images via endorsements in exchange for product sales**. Places like Canada's Wonderland or Prince Edward Island **exchange experiences for customers' time and money**. Not-for-profit organizations like Covenant House exchange **services for the time of their clients and exchange the concept of making a difference to the problem of homelessness for the money of their donators**. **For an exchange to occur, at least two people or organizations must be willing to make a trade, and each must have sommething the other wants. Both parties must agree on the value of the exchange and how it will be carried out. Each party also must be free to accept or reject the other's terms for the exchange.** Under these conditions, a gun-wielding rober's offer to "exchange" your money for your life does not constitute a valid economic exchange. 

### Marketing As a Decision-making Process
The American Marketing Association definition of marketing suggests that **marketing is primarily a decision-making process that allows individuals and organizations to achieve objectives by creating value that satisfies stakeholder needs and wants.** As such, marketing decision making involves a series of steps that entail both careful thought (planning) and action(executing). When it's done right, marketing is a strategic decision-making process in which marketing managers determine the most appropriate set of decision for a particular organization at a particular time that will help the organization meet its long term objective

        Understand the Opportunity--> Market Strategy: Specify the Value-->Marketing Mix: Create the Value--> Implementation & Evaluation: Realize the Value

        Understanding the opportunity
                Environmental Analysis
                * External Environment: 1. Macro; 2. Consumer; 3. Industry; 4. Competitive
                * Internal Environment: 1. Current strategy; 2. Organization; 3. Skill & Resources; 4. Preferences
                
                SWOT Analysis
                * SWOT summary
                * Strategy matrix

                Other Analysis

                Marketing Theory, Concepts, Principles
        
        Marketing Strategy: Specify the value
                Marketing Objectives

                Target Market: 1. Segmentation; 2. Profile analysis; 3. Targeting

                Positioning: 1. Strategic orientation; 2. Differentiation; 3. Defendability; 4. Brand personality

        Marketing Mix: Create the Value
                Product: 1. objectives; 2. Concept; 3. Product line; 4. Service strategy; 5. Branding; 6. Package & label

                Pricing: 1. Objectives; 2. Policy; 3. Price point & tactics; 4. Terms & conditions

                Distribution: 1. Objectives; 2. System; 3. Channel management; 4. Supply chain management

                Communication: 1. Audience & Objectives; 2. Approach; 3. Key messages/tactics; 4. Communication mix; 5. budget & Allocation; 6. Implementation
        
        Implementation & Evaluation: realize the Value
                Plan the Implementation: 1. Action plan; 2. Task schedule; 3. Benchmarks; 4. Contingency plan; 5. Research plan; 6. Budget

                Evaluation: 1. Financial analysis; 2. Cost-benefit analysis; 3. Recommendation

                Execute the Plan

                Measure Performance

##### Understand the Opportunity
* **Marketing decisions start with understanding the situation, or context, in which the decision need to be made.** **Situational analysis** involves identifying opportunities to create value for the organization by creating value for customers. First, it involes understanding factors relating to **the markets in which an organization competes**, such as **understanding general trends in that market, consumer or organizational buying behavior, industry dynamics, and the strategies and likely reactions of competitors**. The marketing decision makers need to assess factors relating to **their own organization and their ability to create value and compete effectively in those markets**. These internal factors include **understanding the relative effectiveness of their current marketing strategy, their resources, competencies, and expertise, and the values or mission of the organization**.

##### Specify the Value: Market Strategy
* Marketer make marketing strategy decisions to achieve the objectives of their organization, which usually include both **financial objectives (such as a particular profit target)** and **marketing objectives (such as sales targets or market share targets)**. **Once the marketing and other objectives are developed, the organization develops a marketing strategy aimed at achieving those objectives**.
* The **most critical** decision marketers make in developing marketing strategy is **the selection of the specific group of customers** on which they will focus their customer value creation efforts. [def] A market segment is **a distinct group of customers within a large market who have similar needs, wants, preferences, and behaviors, who seek similar product solution, and whose needs differ from other customers in the larger market**. Parents with young children, for example, typically seek different entertainment products than teenagers and young adults.
* [def] Market segmentation is **the process of dividing the overall market into groups of consumers who are sufficiently similar within the group to want a similar value offer and different enough from other groups to want a different value offer than those other groups**. The challenge is to identify groups with real differences in underlying needs, wants, preferences, behaivors, and opinions about value. Consequently, detailed segment profiles of each group msut be developed that specify these differences and other characteristics of the group that will help marketers design and present a valued offer.  For example, one way the Levi Strauss lices up the market is in terms of age segments--this makes sense, since different age group have different purposes. **Business-to-busienss markets** are someimtes divided into segments using characteristics such as type of business, decision-making criteria, size, or sales volume, if these characteristics reflect differences in the needs, wants, or behaivours of organizations.
* Marketers weigh each of the segments in terms of **profitability potential against a number of factors**, including **the organization's ability to create value and satisfy the needs of the segments**, **their goals and resources, and their ability to compete effectively against other offering**. On the basis of this analysis, the organization decides whether it will focus on a single segment or on several segments. The chosen market(s) become the organization's target market(s) toward which it directs its marketing efforts. For example, Hewitt is an outsourcing cojmpany that has decided to focus exclusively on the needs of the human resources professional. As the ad for Hewitt illustrates, it offers tailored solutino in HR areas such as talent, benefits, payroll, health care, retirement.
* Because different target markets have different and sometimes conflicting needs, wants, and preferences, marketers typically have to choose among alternative segments on which to focus. This is one of Richard Hill's dilemmas at Yellow Point Lodge--how to attract new consumers without turning off long-loyal consumers at the same time. Similarly, Canadian fashion designer Linda Lundstrom (and her company, Linda Lundstrom Ltd) doesn't make clothes for everyone. First, she designs clothes only for women. Lundstrom further narrows her market by focusing on the needs of women with less than perfect figures. She also gears her line toward working women who need clothes that can wear and travel well. Her most successful item is an extremely warm winter coat that combines comfort and function with a style based on First Nations artist Norval Morrisseau's traditional patterns.
* Some firms choose to reach as many customers as possible by offering their products to a mass market, which consists of all possible customers in a market, regardless of the difference in their specific needs and wants. This strategy, however, is not tenable in the long run. Usually competitors of mass markets, or even the mass marketers themselves, bring alternative products to market that have greater appeal to a subset of the people in the mass market, eroding the market share of the mass market product
* Many companies know that they must look for potential target markets beyond their own geographical borders to compete in today's world economy. Modern marketers are busy meeting the needs of people all around the world, especially when the demand for products at home flattens. Expanding internationally is desirable,, for example, to the Mattel Corporation (www.mattel.com). The average North American girl owns eight barbies, making it the best-selling toy ever. The domestic market is starting to become saturated, so Mattel is diversifying to offset the company's reliance on North American Barbie sales. Europe has nearly twice as many children as North America; and numbers in Mexico, South America, Japan, and Southeast Asia are even greater. Mattel now manufactures 75 percent of its toys in plants around the world, including Indonesia, Malaysia, China, Mexico, and Italy
* **Positioning** After choosing the target market(s), marketers need to develop an offering that appeals to the needs, wants, and prefernces of the target market better than alternatives provided by competitors. This process starts with positioning the product. **Positioning** involves developing a marketing strategy to differentiate an offering from others in the marketplace in the mind of the target customers. It establishes how the marketing organization wants its brand to be known--what value it offers relative to competitors and why that offer is superior to others for a particular target market. Positioning also involves developing strategy to defend the image that has or will be created and specifying the unique competencies, resources, and know-how that allows a firm to sustain its superiority. The positioning of a brand often involves developing a brand personality. For example, VOSS Water (www.vosswater.com) has developed a personality of sophistication. Its water comes from a "virgin aquifer that has been shielded for centuries under ice and rock in the untouched wilderness of Central Norway". At prices ranging up to $22.00 for a 0.5L bottle, customers are putting a significant premium on that personality!

#### Create the Value: Marketing Mix Decisions
Once t he desired positioning is established, marketers need to create the value proposition reflected in the offer. To do this, marketers make a set of decisions about the product itself, its price, the place it is available for purchase, and the activities that introduce it to consumers. These decisions, collectively called the marketing mix decisions, create the value promised by the product positioning and are intended to be sufficiently motivating (valuable) to create a desired exchange response among members of the target market. Just as every college student seems to have an iPod, every government official seems to have a BlackBerry. The marketing mix decisions made by Apple and RIM created a value proposition so motivating that they have had trouble keeping up with demand.
* The marketing mix decisions are commonly known as the four Ps. **product, price, promotion(communication), and place(distribution). Together, the bundle of marketing mix elements represents an offer of value to the consumer: What the consumer will receive in an exchange. Sometimes marketers consider a fifth P, "people" or relationship. Others, including the authors of this book, view managing exchange relationship as being so central to what marketers do that it should be integrated into all the other marketing decisions and not treated as a separate decision.
* Just as a radio DJ puts together a collection of separate songs ( amusical mix) to create a certain mood, the idea of a mix in this context reminds us that no single marketing activity is sufficient to accomplish the organization's objectives, and that consistency among the decisions is critical to the overall marketing program.

###### Product
* **The product is a good, service, idea, place, person**--whatever is offered for exchange. Notice, therefore, that the concept of product as defined in marketing is broader than its usage in everyday language, where it primarily signifies a tangible good. Product strategy decisions begin with objectives: What do you want to achieve with your product decision? For example, Proctor & Gamble (P&G) wanted to expand its market share internationally but found that many consumers could not afford its traditional brands. This prompted P&G to develop new products, such as Pampers Uni diapers, that are tailored to meet the needs of international customers, such as those in Brazil, but have a significantly lower cost structure. Then you need to specify the product concept. What is the core value (benefit) you are offering, and how do you deliver that value through the features, functions, design, and other attributes of the product? Marketers also make product line decisions about how many variants or versions (models, types, sizes, colors, shapes, flavors) of a product they will offer. Honda, for example, chooses to compete with just a few models of cars, while General Moters has more than 100. Service strategy decisions also need to be made. Disneyland or Walt Disney World, the strategy to create the desired customer experience is central to what they do, but even packaged goods like cereal or consumer goods like a notebook computer can have important service aspects. Dell, for example, offers free delivery, online and phone-based technical support, and a range of options for getting your computer fixed if there is a problem, including in-home repair. Product decisions also include **branding strategy**: Will a product be part of a family of product like Cambell's soups, an individual brand like BlackBerry, a store brand like President's Choice, or just be named for the product category, like "Spaghetti"? Finally, **product decisions include packaging and labelling decisions. Be honest, how many times have you bought something because the package looked good?**

###### Price
* The price is the seller's assessment of the value of a product; what they would liketo receive from the buyer in exchange for the product. Pricing strategy decisions start with pricing objectives: What do you want to accomplish with your pricing decisions? Are you trying to support a premium position like Gucci, a competitive position like Zellers or Wal-Mart(lower prices), or you trying to increase market share, like Procter & Gamble in Brail? **Different pricing objectives suggest different pricing policies.** P & G used to determine its prices based on what a product actually cost to develop plus a profit, but now it prices products by what consumers in different countries can afford. Walmart uses Every Day Low Prices as a policy. Marketers also have to ome up with the actual price. Price point decisions need to take into consideration the cost of creating and delivering the product, competitors' prices, and what the customer is willing to pay, among other factors. There are also psychological consideraitons. Should the price of Croc shoes be $39.99 or $37.54, or $40.00? Finally, marketers need to decide or pricing terms and conditions: When does the price need to be paid, how can it be paid, are there any special deals or discounts?

###### Distribution
Place concerns the availability of the product to the customer at the desired time and locatino. Channels of distribution involve firms that work together to get a product from a producer to a consumer. For consumer goods like Root clothing products, a distribution channel includes retailer suchas Sears as well as their own Root retail outlets and the Root website. **Distribution decisions begin with specifying the distribution objectives: Are you trying to make the product as widely available as possible, minimize the cost of getting the product to the customer, or make it easy for customers to compare your product with others--such as with an Auto Mall?** To achieve one or another of these distribution objectives, marketers decide on a distribution system: **What type of distribution system will be created, how many traditional approach or non-traditional one?** Channel relationship management decisions also need to be made: How will you identify, attract, motivate, and keep your channel partners working toward your common goals and how will you deal with the conflict that is inherent between the roles of channel members? Finally, supply chain management involves systems and process to ensure efficient and effective value creation, from the sourcing of raw materials to the customer receiving the value. The include logistics, the physical distribution of goods to the customer, or a service blueprint for delivering a service experience.

###### Communication
Promotion refers to **the marketing commmunication activities undertaken to inform consumers or organizations about goods, services, or ideas, and to encourage potential customers to buy these goods, services, or ideas**. Unlike the other marketing mix decisions, **communication strategy decisions start with deciding the audience, or target of the commmunication, not the commmunication objective**. The audience is a specific subset of a target market whose members are the receives of the communication. **A communication campaign usually has many different elements targeted at different audiences, but we design the strategy for each audience.** For each audience we need to decide the commmunication objectives: **What do you want to achieve with your communication decisions? is the objective to create awareness about your product, develop purchase intentions, encourage trial of the product, or develop trust with your customers** To achieve these or other communications objectives, **marketers need to decide on an overall approach to the communication strategy: Will it be a push strategy where retailers are encouraged to stock products that customers can find or a pull strategy where customers are encouraged to seek products from retailers or other channel members?** Will it be one-way communication or will you seek feedback from customers and try to develop a relationship with them? Once the overall approach is decided, we need to decide the key messages; what we want to communicate to our audience; and the tactics we will use to get their attention. Then we decide on the appropriate communications mix to get our message(s) to our audience: Should we develop advertising for television, radio, or print pulications; create promotions like Tim Hortons' Roll Up the Rim to Win contest; use public relations as Raincoast Books used to gain free publicity around Harry Potter book launches; communicate using a sales force; create a website; or use viral marketing techniques such as developing entertaining video clips that customers can sendtheir friends? We also need to decide on a creative strategy that will get the attention of our audience, schedule the timing and placement of any advertising that is used, determine a budget to do all this, and develop a way to evaluate whether our communication strategy has been effective.
* For example, Mike's Hard Lemonade Company's communication strategy supports the brand image by developing and supporting the "personalities" of Mike and the lemonade. Cute stories about Mike and lemons were included on the packaging, and the product was brought to consumers' attention with print advertising, in-store displays, and on-shelf signage. After Mike's initial success, television advertising was created that showed "lemon being hurt real bad in the making of this product" and investigators trying to determine "who has been hurting the lemons". These quirky, light-hearted ads helped make Mike's the leading brand in the Canadian cooler market. There is also a hip Internet site (www.mikeshardlemonade.com) that further supports the brand's personality.


Because of all these, there are lots of decisions that marketers make for creating, communicating, and delivering value to customers and for managing customer relationships in ways that benefit the organization and its stakeholders. Once made these decision need to be acted upon

### Implementation and Evaluation: Realize the Value
Before we can evaluate the realtive merits of our proposed marketing decisions we need plan for their implementatino, **such as identifying the key actions that need to be done, assigning tasks to people to do them, and developing a schedule of when they need to be completed.** Implementation decisions also involve developing **performance benchmarks(targets) to help us assess if our strategy is working** and **a contingency plan that outlines what we will do if things do not go as planned**. Finally, we need to **identify the key assumptions** that we have made in developing our plan and **outline how we will use market research to test those assumptions and ensure we are making informed decisions**. We also need to **specify and allocate a budget** to make all this happen.
* After planning the implementation, **we then need to decide whether or not to proceed.** This overall recommendation is based on an assessment of whether implementing the strategy **is worth it from the organization's perspective (value to the organization).** To make this decision we need to do *financial analysis* and *cost-benefit* analysis, which you will learn more about in Chapter 2. This decision is usually made in contrast to other viable alternatives, to ensure that the best strategy is being considered. **The alternatives typically come from different choice of target markets, different positioning, or different ways of creating value via the marketing mix. It may seem like a lot of wasted work to end up not recommending implementation--but you can't make an informed decision without first specifying the best strategy you can think of.**
* If you decide to implement the strategy, the next step is execution--getting it done and then measuring performance against the plan. Throughout this text we will show you examples of measures, or "metrics", that marketers use to assess their performance.
* In the final chapter, we will show you **how this marketing decision process comes together in the creation of a formal marketing plan**. Marketing planning is **a process of identifying and analyzing alternative ways of competing in the marketplace.** To see how much thinking and anylsis goes into marketing decisions, consider some of the many factors a firm like Levi Strauss has to think about when planning and developing its marketing strategy:

                * What jeans styles will our core customers of young people be looking for in three to five years?
                * What are our competitors doing to attract and keep our customers? How are we positioned competitively in the mind of the consumer?
                * Which customer groups that don't currently buy a lot of blue jeans might we target for Levi's products?
                * How will new developments in computerized production technologies affect the denim manufacturing process?
                * Will the current trend for many companies to institute "Causal Fridays" when employees can wear jeans to work, affect long term demand for Levi's products
                * What will be the impact on our brand's image if we decide to sell our jeans through discount stores such as Walmart?
                * Is television advertising (an expensive marketing commmunications tool) the right way to communicate with our target market, or is there a better way?
                * How will consumers' growing awareness about the use of child labour in Third World countries affect their attitude toward manufacturers that locate plants overseas?

* an example of a marketing plan in the appendix, Chpater 2 focuses on the environment of marketing decisions and introduces the internal and external environment. Chapter 3 focuses on how to make target market and positioning decisions. Chapter 4 gives you an introduction to the research marketers do to make informed decisions. Chapters 5 and 6 examine key consumer and organizational buying behavior concepts that help us develop better market segment profiles. Chapter 7 through 13 focus on the marketing mix decisions. Chapter 14 pulls it all together and shows you how all the marketing decisions must support each other in the writing of a marketing plan and how the tools, concepts, and principles discussed throughout the text can be used to provide rationale for a particular course of action.

### The Marketing of Value
* So far, we have talked a lot about marketing delivering value to customers. As we noted as the beginning of this chapter, value refers to the benefits a customer receives from buying a good or service relative to the costs of acquiring and using it. Marketing then communicates these benefits to the customer in the form of a value proposition, **a marketplace offering that fairly and accurately sums up the value that the customer will realize if he or she purchases the product**. The challenge to the marketers is to create an attractive value proposition. A bit part of this challenge is convincing customers that this value proposition is superior to others they might choose from competitors.
* How do customers (such as your potential employer) decide how much value they will get from a purchase? **One way to look at value is to think of it simply as a ratio of benefits to costs--that is, customers "invest" their precious time and money to do business with a firm, and they expect a certain bundle of benefits in return**. **But here's the tricky part. Value is in the eye of the beholder, meaning that something (or someone) may be worth a lot to the planet, but a prospective employer may form a different opinion.** **A big part of marketing is ensuring that the thing being exchanged is appreciated for the value it holds**. Let's look at value from the different perspectives of the parties that are involved in an exchange: the customers, the sellers, and society.

###### Value from the Customer's Perspective
SKIM: [summary] the value proposition includes the whole bundle of benefits the firm promise to deliver, like making a statement about the type of person you are or wish you were.

###### Value from the Seller's Perspective
* SKIM: [summary] They determine whether the exchange is profitable to the seller. That's a very important factor, but not the only one. For example, in addition to making a buck or two, many firms measure value along other dimensions, such as prestige among rivals or pride in doing what they do well. Some firms by definition doen't even care about making money, or they may not even be allow to make money; nonprofit like Greenpeace, the Canadian Cancer Society, or CBC Radio regard value in terms of their ability to motivate, educate, or delight the public.
* Company that calculate the lifetime value of a customer look at how much profit they expect to make from a particular customer, including each and every purchase he or she will make from them now and in the future. To calculate lifetime value, company estimate the amount the person will spend and then subtract what it will cost to maintain this relationship. College and university students are particularly important to banks because you represent a lifetime of value to them, and while you might not have much money now, one day you probably will.

###### Providing Value To Stakeholders By Creating a Competitive Advantage
* All things being equal, a firm creates value for stakeholders when it convinces customers that they will acquire greater value by buying its products rather than those of competitors. How are companies able to accomplish this goal? The answer is that the underlying goal of all marketing strategies is to create a competitive advantage for the firm. A firm has a **competitive advantage when it is able to outperform the commpetition, providing customers with a benefit the competition can't.** A competitive advantage gives consumers a reason to choose one product over another again and again.
* How does a firm go about creating a competitive advantage. The first step is to **identify what it does really well. A distinctive competency is a firm's capability that is superior to that of its competition.** For example, Coca-Cola's success in global markets--Coke commands 50 percent of the world's soft drink business--is relatived to its distinctive commpetencies in distribution and marketing communications. Coke's distribution system got a jump on the competition during World War II. To enable soldiers fighting overseas to enjoy a five-cent Coke, the US government assisted Coca-Cola in building 64 overseas bottling plants. Coke's skilful marketing commmunications program, a second distinctive competency, has contributed to its global success. In addtion to its television commmercials, Coke blankets less-developed countries such as Tanzania with its print advertisements so that even people without televisions will think of Coke when they get thirsty.
* The second step in developing a competitive advantage is **to turn a distinctive competency into differential benefit--one that is important to customers**. Differential benefits **set product apart from competitiros' products by providing something unique that customers want. Differential benefits provide reasons for customers to pay a premium for a firm's products and exhibit a strong brand preference**. For many years loyal Apple computer users benefited from **superior graphics capability** compared to their PC-using counterparts. Later, when PC manufacturers caught up with this competitive advantage, Apple relied on **its inventive product designers to create another differential benefit--futuristic looking computers in a multitude of colours**. This competitive advantage even caused many loyal PC users to take a bite of the Apple.

###### Adding Value Through the Value Chain
* Many different players--both within and outside a firm--need to work together to create and deliver value to customers. One approach to understanding the delivery of value and satisfaction is the value chain. This term refers to a series of activities involved in designing, producing, marketing, delivering and supporting any product. In addition to marketing activities, the value chain includes business functions such as human resource management and technology development.
* This concept reminds us that every product starts with raw materials that are of relatively limited avalue to the end customer. Each link in the chain has the potential to either add or remove value from the product the customer eventually buys. The successful firm is t he one that can perform one or more of these activities better than other firms--this is its competitive advantage. The main activies of value-chain members include the following:

        * Bring in materials to make the product, referred to as "inbound logistics"
        * Converting the materials in to the final product, referred to as "operations"
        * Shipping out the final product, referred to as "outbound logistics"
        * Marketing the final product, in which marketing and sales come into play
        * Servicing the product/customer, referred to as "service" 

* A Value Chain for the Apple iPod

        Inbound Logistics
        * Planar lithium battery (Sony)
        * Hard drive (Toshiba)
        * MP3 decoder and controller chip (Portal Player)
        * Flash memory chip (Sharp Electronics Corp.)
        * Stero digital-to-analog converter (Wolfson Microelectronics Ltd)
        * Firewire interface controller (Texas Instruments)

        Operations
        * Consumer research
        * New-product-development team
        * Engineering and production

        Outbound logistics
        * Trucking companies
        * Wholesalers
        * Retailers

        Marketing and Sales
        * Advertising
        * Sales force

        Service
        * Computer technicians

* All these companies (and more) belong to Apple's value chain. This means that Apple must make a lot of value-chain decisions. What electronic components will go into its music players? What accessories will be included in the package? What trucking companies, wholesalers, and retailers will deliver the iPods to stores? What service will it provide to customers after the sale? And what marketing strategies will it use? In some cases, **members of a value chain will work together to coordinate their activities** to be more efficient and thus create a competitive advantage
* We will start with a focus on how companies decide what to make, how and where to sell it, and whom to sell it to. Then, we'll take a look at how they decide to "position" the product in the marketplace, including choices about what it should look like, how its value should be communicated to customers, and how much to charge for it. As we reach the end of our marketing journey, we'll talk about how the product actually gets delivered to consumers.

#### value from Society's Perspective
* Every company's activities influence the world around it, in ways both good and bad. Therefore, we must also consider how marketing transactions add or subtract value from society. In many ways, we are at the mercy of marketers because we trust them to sell us products that are safe and perform as promised. We also trust them to price and distribute these products fairly. Conflicts often arise in business when the pressure to succeed in the marketplace provokes dishonest business practices--the collapse of energy giant Enron and the tiral of its (later) former chief executive officer Ken Lay are a case in point.

###### The Dark Side of Marketing
* Whether intentionally or not, some marketers do violate their bond of trust with consumers, and unfortunately the "dark side" of marketing often is the subject of harsh criticism. In some cases, these violations are illegal, such as when retailer **adopt a "bait-and-switch" selling strategy, luring consumers into the store with promises of inexpensive products with the sole intent of getting them to switch to higher-priced goods.**
* In other cases, marketing practices have detrimental effects on society even though they are not actually illegal. Some alcohol and tobacco companies *advertise in low-income neighbourhoods* where abuse of these products is a big problem. Other sponsor commercials depicting groups of people in an unfavourable light or *sell products that encourage antisocial behavior*. An online game based on the Columbine High School massacre drew criticism from some (including the father of a student who died in the 1999 attack) who say it trivializes the actions of the two teen killers.
* Some harmful consumer behaviors such as excessive drinking or cigarette smoking stem from social pressures, and the cultural value placed on money encourages activities such as shoplifting or insurance fraud. Exposure to unattainalbe ideals of beauty and success can create dissatisfaction with the self. Let's briefly review some dimensions of "the dark side" of consumer behaviour.

        1. **marketers create artificial needs** The marketing system has come under fire from both ends of the political spectrum. On the one hand, some members of the religious right believe that advertising contributes to the moral breakdown of society by presenting images of sinful pleasure. On the other hand, some leftists argue that the same deceitful promises of material pleasure function to buy off people who would otherwise be revolutionaries working to change the system. They argue that the system creates demand that only its products can satisfy. **A Response**: A need is a basic motive, while a want represents one way that society has taught us the need can be satisfied. For example, while thirst is biologically based, we are taught to want Coca-Cola to satisfy that thirst rather than, say, water. Thus, the need is already there; marketers simply recommend ways to satisfy it. If the basic need is not there, no amount of slick marketing communication tactics is going to convince consumers to buy.
        2. Marketing teaches us to value people for what they own rather than who they are. Goods are arbitrarily linked to desireable qualities, so we learn that we can be popular, happy, and fulfilled only if we buy these products. A response: Products meet existing needs, and advertising only helps to communicate their availability. Advertising is an important source of consumer information. It is a service for which consumers are willing to pay because the information it provides reduce the time and effort needed to learn about the product
        SKIP


### Careers in Marketing
* Many students asume that the "typical" marketing job is in a large, consumer-oriented packaged goods commpany like Procter&Gamble. In fact, marketers work in other types of organizations, for example:

        Service organizations (e.g., Telus, Intrawest)
        E-commerce organizations (e.g., Chapters Online; Amazon.ca)
        Technology companies (e.g., IBM Canada; Bombardier)
        Industrial equipment companies (e.g., Komatsu; Nortel)
        Retailers (e.g., Shoppers Drug mart; Sears)
        SKIP

## Chapter Review
* Marketing Concepts: Testing Your Knowledge

        1. Briefly explain what marketing is.
        2. What is the marketing concept? how is it different from mthe social marketing concept?
        3. How does marketing facilitate exchange?
        4. What is customer value?
        5. Define these terms, consumer goods, services, and industrial products
        6. What are the elements of the marketing mix? What role do they play in creating value for the customer?
        7. Explain the concept of market segmentation. What can't a firm be successful in the long term by practising mass marketing
        8. What are target markets? How do marketers select and reach target markets?
        9. Trace the evolution of the marketing concept.
        10. What are some criticisms of marketing and how would you respond to them

* Marketing Concept: Discussing Choice and Issues

        1. The marketing concepts focuses on the ability of marketing to satisfy customer needs. As a student, how does marketing satisfy your needs? What areas of your life are affected by marketing? What areas of your life (if any) are not affected by marketing
        2. Do you think students should study marketing even if they are not planning a career in marketing or busienss? Explain your reasoning.
        3. In this chapter, a number of criticisms of marketing were discussed. Have you heard these criticisms before? What other criticisms of marketing have you heard? Do you agree or disagree with these criticisms, and why?

* Marketing Practice:

        1. An old friend of yours has been making and selling leather handbags and bookbags to acquaintances and friends for some time and is now thinking about opening a shop in your town. But he is worried about whether he'll have enough customers who want handcrafted bags to keep a business going. Knowing that you are a marketing student, he asks you for some advice. What can you tell him about market segments, target markets, product, price, marketing communications, and distribution strategies that will help him get his business off the ground?
        2. Assume that you are employed by your city's chamber of commerce. A major focus of the chamber is to get industires to move to your city. As a former marketing student, you know that there are issues involving product, price, marketing communications, and even distribution that can attract busienss. Next week, you have an opportunity to speak to the members of the chamber, and your topic will be "Marketing a City". Develop an outline for that presentation
        3. As a marketing professional, you have been asked to write a short piece ofr a local business newsletter about the state of marketing today. You think the best way to address this topic is to review how the marketing concept has evolved and to discuss the New Era orientation of marketing. Write the short article you will submit to the editor of the newsletter.
        4. You and your friends sometimes discuss the various courses you are taking. One of your friends says to you, "Marketing's nothing but selling stuff. Anybody can do that without taking a course." Another friend says, "yeah, all marketers do is write ads". As a role-playing exercise, present your argument against these statements to your class.

* Marketing Mini-Project: Learning by Doing

        The purpose of this mini-project is to develop an understanding of the importance of marketing to different organization.
        1. Working as a team with two or three other students in your class, select an organization in your community that practices marketing. it may be a manufacturer, service provider, retailer, not-for-profit organization--almost any organization will do. Schedule a visit with someone in the organization who is involved in the marketing activities. Ask that person to give your group a tour of the facilities and explain the organization's marketing activities.
        2. Divide the following topics among your team, and ask each person to be responsible for developing a set of questions to ask during the interview to learn about the comapny's program:

                * What customer segment the company targets
                * How it determines needs and wants
                * What products it offers, including features, benefits, and goals for customer satisfaction
                * What its pricing strategies are, including any discounting policies
                * What marketing communication strategies it uses, and what these emphasize to position the product(s)
                * How it distributes products, and whether it has encountered any problems
                * How marketing planning is done and who does it
                * Whether social responsibility is part of the marketing program and, if so, in what way
                
        3. Develop a team report of your findings. In each section of the report, share what you learned that is new or surprising to you compared to what you expected (based on your reading of Chapter 1)
        4. Develop a team presentation for your class that summarizes your findings. Conclude your presentation with ocmments on what your team believes the company was doing well and where it could make improvements.

* Real People, Real Surfers: exploring the Web

        The New Era orientation means that a firm like Mountain Equipment Co-op is devoted to excellence in sourcing and producing products that benefit customers as well as society, the organization's employees, and their members. Many firms share this on their Internet webpages, Visit  the website for Mountain Equipment Co-op (www.mec.ca). Then visit the website for one of their competitors such as REI (www.REI.com) or Taiga (www.taigaworks.ca). Follow the links in the sites to learn as much as you can about the company. You might first check the site map to see what links are provided on the site. Look for answers to the following questions.

                1. What evidence do you find on the firms' websites that each is a New Era firm?
                2. Which company has the better webiste? What makes it better? Based on your visit to the webiste, what do you think is the major purpose of each company's site? To promote their products? To sell on the web? To develop a brand image? Something else?
                3. How does each company use its webiste for promoting its products? Is the website a unique form of marketing communications or jsut an extension of their normal advertising?
                4. What market segment do you think each firm is targeting with its website? What features of the websites gave you this idea?
                5. Do the websites provide an opportunity for the firm to gather information about customers so that it can customize contact with them
                6. Are there any features of the website that will cause consumers to come back again and again?
                7. What are your major criticisms of each of the webiste? What would you do to improve each site from a marketing perspective?

### Case Study
SKIP

# Chapter 2: Making Strategic Marketing Decisions
* Case study: Michel Bendayan with Megablok (www.megabloks.com). SKIM
* Whether a firm is a not-for-profit organization like the United Way, a family-based retailer like Army & Navy department stores, or a major manufacturer like Mega Bloks, **planning for the future in a key to prosperity. Success in the competitive world of business is not accidental; businesses that succeed do so because they are capable of developing and implementing superior strategies in the marketplace. Often, businesses that fail meet their fate because of improper planning**
* All firms operate in a dynamic environment. In today's world of business, consumer interests, technologies, commpetition, and the economy are changing faster than ever. This makes good planning more important than ever, as planning enables a firm to meet the challenges of this dynamic environment and to control its own destiny.
* In this chapter, we'll look at the different steps in creating and implementing plans within a business organization. First we'll examine **how marketers make the decisions that guide the entire organization**. Then we'll examine how marketers make the marketing decision outlined in Chapter 1. Finally, we will discuss the global and ethical context in which marketing decisions are made.
* In successful firms, both large and small, **business planning is an ongoing process of making decisions that guide the firm both in the short term and for the long haul. Planning identifies and builds on a firm's strengths and helps managers at all levels make informed decisions in a changing business environment. Planning means that an  organization develops objectives before it takes action**. In large firms, such as IBM, Sony, and L'Oreal, which operate in many markets, **planning is a complex process involving many people from different areas of the company's operations**. In a small business like Mac's Diner, however, planning is quite different; Mac himself is chief cook, occasional dishwasher, and the sole company planner. With mid-size firms, the planning process falls somewhere in between, depending on the size of the firm and the complexity of its operations.
* Business plan's process is more complex than our day-to-day planning. Business planning usually occurs on an annual basis at three level--strategic planning, marketing planning, and operational planning.

                * What it is: Strategic Planning
                * Who does it: planning done by top-level corporate management
                * What they do: 
                        1. Define the mission
                        2. Evaluate the internal and external environment
                        3. Set organizational or SBU objectives
                        4. Establish the business portfolio (if applicable)
                        5. Develop growth strategies and tactics

                * What it is: Functional Planning (In Marketing Department, called Marketing Planning)
                * Who does it: Planning done by top functional-level management such as the firm's chief marketing officer (CMO)
                * What they do:
                        1. Perform a situation analysis
                        2. Set marketing objectives 
                        3. Develop marketing strategies
                        4. Develop tactics to implement marketing strategies
                        5. Monitor and control marketing strategies

                * What it is: Operatinoal Planning
                * Who does it: Planning done by supervisory managers
                * What they do: 
                        1. Develop action plans to implement the marketing plan
                        2. Use marketing metrics to monitor how the plan is working

* **Strategic planning** is the managerial decision process that matches the organization's resources (for example, manufacturing facilities, financial assets, and skilled workforce) and capabilities to its market opportunities for long-term growth. These decisions focus on the firm's ability to respond to changes and opportunities in its environment. **In a strategic plan, the top management team (that is, the chief executive officer, or CEO, president, and other top executives) defines the firm's purpose (mission) and specifies what the firm hopes to achieve over the next few years (organizational objectives)**. Increasingly this planning takes place in consultation with a cross-section of employees who bring varied perspectives and knowledge to the process. For example, a firm's strategic plan may set a goal of increasing t he firm's total revenues by 10 or even 20 percent in the next five years. Strategies and tactics are then developed for achieving those objective. **Strategies reflect what a firm is going to do to achieve an objective. For example, to increase total revenues by 20 percent in the next five years, an organization like Mega Bloks may decide to enter a new market with either new or existing products.** **Tactics reflect how a strategy is going to be implemented. For example, Mega Bloks may decide to enter the Japanese market with a product line customized for the Japanese consumer**.
* Strategic plans are usually developed for a period of three to five years and take a long-term view of the strategic health of the business. In large firms, strategic planning can actually occur at two different levels. **First, there is overall corporate strategic planning, which determines the organization's different business and product pursuits. Second, the individual business units do strategic planning for their products.** **Strategic planning at the Walt Disney Company, for example, involves an assessment of resources and capabilities for starting new business. In addition to making movies and running theme parks, Disney is now in the cruise ship business and operates a number of Disney vacation resorts. Disney's corporate planning expanded its theme park business to Europe and Japan--separate business units**.
* **Given its high-level, long-term emphasis, a strategic plan is not a document that can be readily implemented. Therefore firms develop a one-year plan, called the marketing plan, which takes its direction from the strategic plan and develops lower-level strategies and tactics for achieving the objectives specified in the strategic plan.** There are two main differences between a strategic plan and a marketing plan. The first is time horizon. While the strategic plan is developed for a period of three to five years, the marketing plan is typically developed for a period of one year. **The second difference is that the marketing plan contains details regarding the marketing mix elements (product strategy, pricing strategy, channel of distribution strategy, marketing communication strategy), while the strategic plan does not contain this level of detail**. What is sometimes confusing about strategies and tactics is that a tactic at the organizational (strategic plan) level becomes, or is reflected in, the strategy at the functional level, and functional level tactics become, or are reflected in, operational strategies.
* **For example, at the strategic planning level, Mega Blok's strategy may be to expand internationally. Their tactic to do this may be to enter t he japanese market with a product line customized for the Japanese consumer. At the marketing planning level, this becomes the strategy to achieve more specific marketing objectives such as "have 20 percent of sales come from new markets this year" and "earn a profit of $5 million from those new market sales". At the marketing planning level, the marketing mix decisions to achieve this market entry strategy are the tactics that specify how the strategy will be implemented and the objectives achieved. In the operational (or immmplementation) plan, a marketing mix decision such as establishing a unique Japanese brand personality for Mega Bloks in Japan becomes the strategy (what you are going to do) while decisions reflecting how this will be done, such as hiring an advertising agency to create a Japanese anime cartoon character, are the tactics. So while strategies reflect what to do and tactics reflect how to do it, they are related across levels of analysis and differ in increasing levels of specificity.**
* Perhaps you are beginning to see the central role played by marketers in the organizatinoal, functional, and operational planning process. **The development of the marketing plan enables the business to set priorities regarding markets it wants to compete in (market segment), customers it wants to serve (target customers), and how it plans to serve those customers (marketing mix strategy). Once these priorities are set, the business develops a set of more specific plans** such as a sales plan, production plan, finance plan, supply chain plan, a human resource plan. Collectively, some businesses call these plans the operating plans or tactical plans. Based upon the requirements of each functional plan, the business is now in a position to allocate resources for the year by setting a budget. Although this process starts from the top of an organization and works its way down to specific tactical decisions, it is typically a two-way process. Marketing and other functional plans are adapted based on the specific objectives and decisions reflected in operational plans and strategic plans are adapted based on the specific objectives and decisions reflected in the functional plans.

### STRATEGIC PLANNING: GUIDING THE BUSINESS
* Marketers don't work and plan in isolation. Before we talk about the marketing planning process, therefore, we need to understand how firms develop strategic plans. In this section, we'll take a closer look at **the five key stages in top-level strategic planning: defining the organization's business mission, evaluating the environment (situational analysis), setting organizational objectives, planning the business portfolio, and devloping growth strategies**.

#### Step 1: Define the Mission
* Top management's first step in the strategic planning process is to answer questions such as: **What business are we in? What customers should we serve? How should we develop the firm's capabilities and focus its effort?**
* In many organizations, the nawers to questions such is these become the lead items in the organizations's strateic plan. The answers become part of the mission statement--a formal description of the organization's purpose and what it hopes to achieve in terms of creating value for customers with what products and resources. For example, the mission of Mothers Against Drunk Driving (MADD) is "to stop drunk driving, support the victims of this violent crime, and prevent underage drinking"
* The idea mission statement is not too broad, too narrow, or too short-sighted. Amission that is too broad will not provide adequate focus for the organization. It doesn't do much good to claim: "We are in the business of making high-quality product"; yet it's hard to find a firm that doesn't make this claim. **However, a mission statement that is too narrow may inhibit managers' ability to visualize possible growth opportunities. If, for example, a firm sees itself in terms of its product only, consumer trend or technology can make that product obsolete--and the firm is left with no future. If Xerox had continued to define its mission in terms of just producing copy machines instead of providing "document solutions", the shift to electronic documents would have left them in the dust the way the Model T Ford replaced the horse and buggy.** Similarly, imagine the disastrous consequences that would happen to McDonald's if its mission statement read:"We are in the hamburger business." It's important to remember that the need for a clear mission statement applies to virtually any type of organization, even those like Mothers Against Drunk Driving, whose objective is to serve society rather than to sell goods or services. Xerox is not alone in its effort to redefine itself. Philip Morris, once simply a tobacco products company, has redefined itself strategically as a consumer products company, offering many of the products we consume on a regular basis. Mission statements should also inspire customers and other stakeholders to want to do business with an organization. **The mission of Campbell's soup, for example, is "Together we will build the world's most extraordinary food company by nourishing people's lives everywhere, every day".**

#### Step 2: Conduct an Environmental (Situational) Analysis
* The second step in strategic planning is **an assessment of an organization's environment, both external and internal. This process is referred to as a *situation analysis*, *environmental analysis*, or sometimes a *business review*.** The external environment consists of t hose uncontrollable elements outside of the organization that may affect it either positively or negatively. While this can include everything from consumers to government regulations to competitors to the economy, there are four main categories of considerations. The first is looking for trends or issues in the macro or general environment that might have a positive or negative effect on your organization. These may be **p**olitical or legal, **e**conomic, **s**ocial or cultural, **t**echnological, or **o**ther (**p.e.s.t.o**) trends or issues that might impact a particular industry and business. **Mega Bloks, for example, might need to understand political or legal issues relating to foreign ownership of joint ventures before deciding how to enter the Japanese market. Similarly, Mega Bloks has to consider the implication of children, all around the world, being increasingly interested in electonic games.** McDonald's has to consider the implications of government imposing "fat" taxes or regulating the use of trans fats in the preparation and consumption of food and consider the social trend toward healthier lifestyles. Canadian lumber companies have to consider the relative strength of the Canadian dollar when developing export strategies. Media producer need to understand the implication of RSS feed technology as teenagers and young adult increasingly seek to customize information and entertainment products accessed via the internet.
* The external environment also includes detailed **cnosumer analysis**. We will be examining these issues in much more detail in Chapter 5 and 6, but this is where you would look for **trends, issues, or considerations with respect to changing consumer segment, segment profiles, and segment sizes**. While socio-cultural trends are more general across society, consumer analysis is focused on understanding specific market segment. **For example, Mega Bloks would need to understand the extent to which "North American" products are perceived positively among consumers in key Japanese market segments.**
*  The external environment also includes industry analysis. Industry considerations might include factors like **industry size and competitiveness, industry structure, industry dynamics (trends, norms, etc), stage of the product life cycle (see Chapter 8), and industry key success factors.** Again, we are just looking for factors that might positively or negatively impact our strategic decisions. **For example, a new entrant into the computer printer industry should understand that manufacturers make little, if any, money on selling the printers, but make significant margins selling ink.**
* Finally, we give consideraiton to **competitive analysis--identifying the key competitors, understanding their strategies and strengths and weaknesses, as well as anticipating likely future strategic changes. Mega Bloks, for example, need to understand and anticipate Lego's marketing strategy in Japan, as well as the strategies of domestic competitors to make an informed market-entry decision.**
* When conducting this situational analysis, **marketers focus on developing a comprehensive understanding of the environment in which they are competing**. This includes a solid understanding of their own organization and its abilities to create value and compete effectively. As illustrated below, **the internal environment is all the controllable elements inside an organization that understand the current strategy of the organization and assess how well that strategy is working: How superior is the current value created by the firm's product. How effective is the current marketing mix? What is the relative market share of these products? What has been their financial performance? Marketers also need to understand the resources and competencies of the organization; its technology, intellectual capital, and other assets. For example, firms need to have appropriate technical skills to compete in their industry. Their employees need to have appropriate skills, abilities, and training to produce the firm's products. A firm's physical facilities can be an important asset for creating customer value, as can its level of financial stability, its relationships with suppliers and channel members, its corporate reputation, and its ownership of strong brands in the marketplace. Marketers also need to understand the organization of the firm--its structure, culture, and system (how they get work done). Some firms, for example, have a positive work climate that encourages creativity, innovation, and teamwork. Other firms find they have a "chilly" climate, characterized by negativity, work-to-rule, and in-fighting among employees--which can seriously affect product quality and relationship with customers, suppliers, distributors, and other stakeholders. Finally the belief, value, and preference of senior management in an organization need to be understood for marketers to consider organization-appropriate alternatives in making key marketing decisions.**

#### Step 3: Set Organizational or SBU Objective
* After constructing a mission statement and understanding the decision environment, top management sets organizational or strategic business unit (SBU) objectives. Very large corporations are normally divided into self-contained divisions, or SBU. Bombardier, for example, produces transportation vehicles ranging from commercial aircraft to high-speed trains, with each product class organized in an SBU. Bombardier Learjet is an SBU of Bombardier. Bombardier Learjet operates as an independent busienss with its own mission and objectives--and its own marketing strategy. Organization and SBU objectives are a direct outgrowth of the mission statement and broadly identify what the ifrm hopes to accomplish within the general time frame of the firm's long-range business plan.
* To be effective, objectives need to be specific, measurable (so firms can tell whether they've met them or not) and attainable. Attainability is especially important--firms that establish "pie in the sky" objectives they can't realistically obtain can create frustration for their employee (who work hard but get no satisfaction of accomplishment) and other stakeholders in the firm, such as vendors and shareholders who are affected when the firm doesn't meet its objectives.
* Objectives may related to **revenue and sales, profibility, the firm's standing in the market, return on investment, productivity, product development, customer relation and satisfaction, and social responsibility.** To ensure measurability, objectives are often stated in numerical terms. For example, a firm might have as an objective a 10 percent increase in profitability. It could reach this objective by increasing productivity, by reducing costs, or by selling off an unprofitable division. Or it might meet this 10 percent objective by developing new products, investing in new technologies, or entering a new market. If you are a business major, you will learn a lot more about setting and specifying objectives in your organizational behavior and business strategy courses.

#### Step 4: Establish the Business Portfolio
* For companies with several different SBU, strategic planning includes making decisionss about how to best allocate resources across these businesses to ensure growth for the total organization. Each SBU has its own focus within the firm's overall strategic plan, and each has its own target market and strategies for reaching its objectives. Just like an independent business, each SBU is a separate profit centre within the larger corporation--that is, each SBU within the firm is responsible for its own costs, revenues, and profits.
* Just as the collection of different stocks an investor owns is called a portfolio, the range of different businesses that a large firm operates is called its business portfolio. As with the Bombardier example, these different busiensses usually represent very different product lines, each of which operates with its own budget and management. Having a diversified business portfolio reduces the firm's dependence on one product line or one group of customers. For example, if travel suffers and Disney has a bad year in theme-park attendance and cruises, its managers hope that the lost sales will be made up by stay-at-homers who go to Disney movies and watch Disney's television networks. There are a variety of portfolio analysis tools available to marketers to help them decide which mix of business units makes most sense in their context, but the use of these tools is typically addressed in a marketing strategy course, and is beyond the scope of this text.

#### Step 5: Develop Growth Strategies
* Although portfolio analysis tools can help managers decide which SBU they should invest in for growth, it doesn't tell them much about how to make that growth happen. Should the growth of an SBU come from finding new customers, from developing new variations of the product, or from some other growth strategy? Part of teh strategic planning at the SBU level entails evaluating growth strategies.
* Marketing penetraion strategies (**Existing products, existing markets**) seek to increase sales of existing products to existing markets such as current users, nonusers, and users of competing brands within a market. For example, Cambell's can advertise new uses for soup in lunches and dinners, encourage current customers to eat more soup, and prod nonusers to find reasons to buy soup. The firm might try to increase sales by cutting prices, improving distribution, or conducting promotions aimed at attracting users of competing soup brands.
* Market development strategies (**Existing Products, new markets**) introduce existing products to new markets. This strategy can mean expanding into a new geographic area, or it may mean reaching new customer segments within an existing geographic market. For example, Red Bull, the "energy" drink that had its beginnings in the 1990s as a cult favorite among the merging young club crowd, is trying to move up the generational chain to attract older users as well. To do this, Red Bull has recently migrated some of its marketing efforts from edgy ads to mainstream messages. Founder and largest shareholder Dietrich Mateschitz understands the dollar power of the older generation, and to appeal to them he has broadened Red Bull's distribution into stores, restaurants, and clubs they frequent. Mateschitz is betting on the vast numbers of clubbers' parents to prop up sales, especially now that the heavyweights like Coca-Cola, pepsiCo, and Anheuser-Busch are trying to make inroads in to the market for energy drinks.
* Product development strategies (**New Products, Existing Markets**) create growth by selling new products in existing markets. Product development may mean extending the firm's product line by developing new variations of the item, or it may mean altering or improving the product to provide enhanced performance. Take the humble mattress, for example. Lately, busienss-class hotels like Sheraton and Marriott have been engaged in something of a "mattress war"--that is, each one is trying to convince the traveller that its bed is softer, mroe comfortable, and more inviting than the competition's (and in some cases, if you fall in love with the bed you can actually buy it and take it home). This "sleeper" strategy appears to be effective: Radisson Hotels' research with guests told it that the mere fact that a bed was "upgraded" would allow the chain to charge an additional $10 per room. These new age beds carry their own brand name-- "Heavenly Bed" at Westin, "The Revive Collection" at Marriott, and "Sweet Sleeper" at Sherraton. Radisson's "Sleeper Number" beds even allow each occupant to adjust the firmness of his or her side with a remote control device. A product development strategy like that is waking up the hotel industry, as the major players (and some smaller luxury hotels) and now scrambling to merchadinse other room elements, such as toiletries.
* Diversification strategies (**New Product, New Markets**) emphasize both new products and new markets to achieve growth. After a long period of sluggish performance in the fast food market, McDonald's has re-energized itself over the past several years through successful strategic planning. For example, feeling that it was maxing out in the hamburger business in the late 1990, McDonald's sought to attract different customers with lines of business to diversify its portfolio of food offerings. Among those are Donatos Pizza, Boston Market, and a controlling interest in Chipotle Mexican Grills. Interestingly, now that its core business is back on track, McDonald's has begun to divest some of these other brands and is shifting from diversification back to more of a product development strategy around the core McDonald's brand.

### The Marketing Planning Process
* Marketing plannings uses the output of the strategic planning process as an input--that is, **the strategic planning process provides the context in which marketing planning is conducted.** Solid planning means that a firm has a viable product at a price consumers are willing to pay, the means to get that product to the place consumers want it, and a way to communicate (promote) the product to the right consumers. The marketing planning process culminates in the development of a formal document called the **marketing plan**. Although we will discuss the process of developing a marketing plan in great detail in Chapter 14, let us briefly examine the marketing plan template shown below.

                I. Executive Summary
                II. Table of Contents
                III. Situation/Environment Analysis
                IV. Opportunity Identification/Assessment & Assumptions
                V. Objectives
                VI. Marketing Strategy
                VII. Marketing Mix Decisions (by Target Market)
                        * Product Decisions
                        * Pricing Decisions
                        * Distribution Decisions
                        * Communication Decisions
                VIII. Implementation & Evaluation
                IX. Appendices

#### Understand the Opportunity
* The marketing planning process begins with a thorough analysis of the decision context facing the firm. The situational analysis conducted for the strategic plan is reviewed and updated and any constraints, assumptions, or other decision parameters that need to be taken into consideration are identified. A strategic assessment of the situation is then conducted to identify the key facts, factors, or observations in the external and internal environments that have the most immportant implications or bearing on the marketing planning. Some environmental considerations are more important to understand than others. For example, Mega Bloks might choose to enter the Japanese market differently if it were able to get patent protection on its building blocks. Richard Hill, at yellow Point Lodge, need to find a strategy consistent with the strong sense of history and tradition of his long-loyal customers. The challenge is in identifying the most important considerations on which to base your marketing strategy.
* **SOT analysis** is one tool often used by marketers (and other planners) in this task. SWOT analysis seeks to identify meaningful strengths and weakness in the organization's internal environment, and opportunities and threats from the external environment. In conducting a SWOT analysis and try to identify the immplications of each of these considerations. For each fact or observation, ask yourself: **why is it important to understand this information? How does it impact a decision that I need to make? Is it a strength of my organization that will help me create superior customer value or defend my desired positioning, or is it a weakness that undermines that ability and would need to be addressed or mitigated (reduce in effect)? Is it an opportunity in the external environment that my organization could exploit or take advantage of in creating or defending value creation or is it a threat that impedes or otherwise limits my organization's ability to compete effectively?**
* If the implication does not have a direct bearing on a decision you have to make, it probably isn't very important and does not need to be included in the SWOT analysis. Determining the strategic implications and what is important and not important can take many years of experience--and you have to practice doing SWOT analysis to gain that experience. However, marketing and business strategy research has found that there are six basic reasons why some organizations fail. These six "fatal flaws" can help you identify some of t he environmental factors that are particularly important to understand and need either to be addressed or mitigated when developing your marketing strategy:
1. Failure to innovate: no differentiation. Organizations that do not create offers that are superior in some way to those already available usually do not survive very long. Lack of differentiation and the inability to create and defend sustainable competitive advantage is a strategic issue that can be observed in an organization's current strategy relative to its competitive environment.
2. Failure to create value: There is no a large enough market segment that wants a particular offer. Sometimes the current strategy of an organization does not create sufficient customer value to attract customers. Insufficient value creation is a strategic issue that is sometimes observed in an analysis of an organization's current strategy relative to segment profile analysis.
3. Failure to persist over time: insufficent margins, volume, or resources. Often related to the failure to create value, but also sometimes realted to the inability to communicate that value. Some organizations are not able to make sufficient margins or generate sufficient sales volume. Many startup organizations fail because they do not have the financial, technical, human, or management resources to compete effectively over time. This is particularly true of busienss with high fixed costs (those that require significant investment in buildings, equipment, people, technology, or overhead--such as software creation or car manufacturing) because it can take many months or years to recover those initial investments. More established organization can fail because their markets change over time: competition increases, demand decreases, or they can't or don't keep up with changing technology. The inability to compete effectively is an important strategic issue that can be observed in both the internal and external environment.
4. Failure to maintain economic scarcity. Offers are imitable or substitutable. Some organizations fail to protect the value they have created and competitiors are able to better satisfy customer demand with similar offers or substitutes. Organizations that are unable to limit direct competition **by means of intellectual property protection; strong supplier, distributor, or customer relationships; cost structure advantages 9such as economic of scale); switching costs; unique knowledge; greater customization or niche (small market) focus; strong brand name; or somme other market entry barrier**, may not be able to defend their positioning
5. Failure to prevent "appropriation" of value: hold-up or slack. Some organizations get held hostage (held up) by stakeholders in strong bargaining positions, such as strong unions, single source supplier, or key distributors. These stakeholders are able to negotiate terms that erode the profitability of the organization. Hold-up issues might be evident in an industry or competitive analysis. Other organizations are wasteful or inefficient with their resources(slack)--often because the management team does not have sufficient experience in that industry to be effective. This might be evident in an analysis of the organization structure, systems, and culture or the current strategy and performance.
6. Failure to be flexible and adapt: the ability to deal with uncertainty and ambiguity. Uncertainty is being able to anticipate events, but not their timing. For example, a chicken satay vendor could anticipate that at some point in time, despite their best food safety efforts, a customer will get food poisoning from eating t he chicken. Effective organizations create risk management plans, crisis management plans, and have insurance and other "due diligence" interventions to limit the impact of potential risks--but in highly volatile, fast-changing industries (like fashion or biotechnology) this can be difficult to do. But some event can not even be anticipated (such as terrorist attacks, currency devaluations, or stock crashes) and managers need to be capable of adapting to changin circumstances. The degree of uncertainty is often assessed in an industry analysis, and the inability of management to plan or adapt could be an issue in an assessment of an organization's management and systems.


* Marketers use SWOT analysis to help them make strategic and tactical decisions. Internal strengths and external opportunities provide rationale to support a particular course of action. Internal weaknesses and external threats provide reasons why a particular course of action might not be appropriate. Weaknesses and threats, however, are not absolute; both can be addressed or mitigated through marketing strategy. Meal Exchange, for example, is a not-for-profit organization dedicated to motivating post-secondary students to increase their involvement in fighting social problems like hunger (www.mealexchange.com). The organization works with colleges and universities so that students can donate the unused money on their meal cards to local food banks, which could then purchase food for those in need. Differences in college and university policies regarding the redemption of meal cards might be a threat in the external environment of Meal Exchange that could limit expansion plans for the organization. However, this threat might be mitigated or overcome by supporters of the Meal Exchange concpet lobbying college and university administrators to change thier policies so  that they could participate in the Meal Exchange program.
* The key to SWOT analysis is not to get bogged down in analysis paralysis. Firms face hundreds, if not thousands, of internal and external environmental considerations that shape and impact their business. You will want to identify the top six to ten issues that might have the greatest implication for the marketing decisions you have to make. Ask yourself: Does this fact or piece of information have a major implication for a decision I have to make? If not, it's probably not worth documenting in a SWOT analysis. A SWOT summary is a list of the most important issues and their implications, such as those shown below, which is an illustrative example of a SWOT analysis summary for the decision faced by Michel Bendayan at Mega Bloks.

        ### Illustrative SWOT Summary for Mega Bloks ###
        Internal Environment:
        Current Strategy & Performance
                --World market-share leader in preschool segment (S)
                * Ability to leverage international brand name in new markets
                --Weak sales and lack of distribution network (W)
                * Status quo not really an option, market may require unique strategy
        Organization (structure, system, culture)
                --Asia, Australia, and Africa are all under one international marketing director (W)
                * May limit ability to focus on Japan and customize Japanese lines
                --Product innovation culture (S)
                * Ability to compete on innovative new product development
                --Rapid growth in past five years (S,W)
                * Has gained significatn international experience that supports its ability to enter the Japanese market
                * But hard to maintain focus and organizational culture with such growth, high degree of Japanese customization may be difficult to implement
        Resource & Competencies
                --Second largest construction block company in the world (after Lego) (S)
                * Has the experience and resources needed for international expansion
                --3000 employees, 75 to 100 product lines, in 100 countries (S)
                * has the people, expertise, and resources to develop custom product lines
                --Basic product not patentable--Leog had a patent (now expired) (W)
        Management Preferences & Values
                --Standardized products are preferable (inferred) (?)
                * Mega Bloks has not previously customized products for a single country, doing so may create a precedent for a wholesale change in strategy that has significatn cost implications. It might be possible to do it for one country but maybe not for all countries.

        External Environment:
        Macro (General) Environment: PESTO
                --American products are often considered prestige products in Japan (O)
                * May be value in offering North American-style product lines
                --High quality consciousness in Japanese society (T)
                * May need greater control over the supply chain
                --Greater awareness and importance of pop culture (T)
                * May need japanese brand personality
        Consumer Analysis
                --Japanese consumers strongly nationalistic (T)
                * Prefer Japanese look and feel
                --Japanese houses are much smaller than those in North America or even Europe (T)
                * Will likely require different packaging, but also maybe different product lines that enable blocks to be used for many designs


#### Objectives
* **Based on the situational analysis, the business then develops a set of marketing objectives.** These are more specific than the SBU objectives, and achieving the marketing objectives helps an organization achieve the overall SBU objectives. **Marketing objectives normally include one or more sales objectives. After all, without sales, there are no profits, and without profits, there is no business.** Some example of sales objectives are: "To increase sales of our deluxe model toy by 15 percent during the next 12 months","To sell one million toys during the holiday season".
* **If a firm has decided that its growth strategy is to focus on product development--new or improved products for existing customers--it will develop product objectives. Because it is more profitable to retain customers than it is to replace them, firms often set objectives for improvements in quality or service to develop customer loyalty. In the breakfast cereal market, where consumers are more fickle than loyal, firms like Kellogg and General Mills may set objectives for developing new brands to suit the tastes of everyone--children, teens, adults--or they may set goals for a new product to retain customers who are being lured away by a comeptitor's new honey coated, fruit-and-fibre cereal. In other cases, a firm may decide to modify a product by taking advantage of trends, as when Frito-Lay developed its line of "lite" snacks.**
* **In some instances, firms find that their best opportunities for growth are stated in the form of market objectives. These goals can involve entering new markets or increasing product usage in served market, through using either market development strategies (existing product sold to new customers) or diversification strategies (new products for new customers)** Manufacturers of recreational vehicles (motor homes and travel trailers), for example, used a market development strategy in targeting baby boomers. Joining together in a "Go RVing Coalition", they spent US$ 15 million on advertising aimed at this under 50 market in a three-year period".

#### Marketing Strategy: Specifying the Value
Once the marketing and other objectives are developed, the organization develops a marketing strategy aimed at achieving those objectives. As was discussed briefly in Chapter 1, **marketing strategy begins with idetnfiying, profiling, and selecting market segments that will be targeted by the strategy. As will be discussed in mroe detail in Chapter 3, choosing the right market to compete in and the right customer to attract is a critical task for a marketer; a task that combines both art and science.** Once the target market customers have been chosen, marketing strategy focuses on teh positioning issues of **strategic orientation, differentiation, defendability, and brand personality**.
* **Strategic orientation** is a discussion of **how the organization will compete in its chosen market(s)**. This would include a discussion of growth strategies (as per above); customer value creation strategy (Chapter 1); or other strategy concepts that you will learn if you take another marketing course. **Your SWOT analysis is another source of strategy alternatives.** The SWOT strategy Matrix in Figure below illustrates how you can develop strategy alternatives by **considering how to utilize your strengths or address your weaknesses to take advantage of opportunities, and how to address or mitigate threats in the external environment.**



                           Strengths                                            Weaknesses

        Opportunity        SO(1)                                                  WO(2)



        Threats         ST(3)                                                     WT(4)

        * SO(1): utilize strengths to take advantage of opportunity: Utilize strong international experience, international brand name, and economies of scale to take advantage of the opportunity that North American brands are valued to Japan

        * WO(2): Address weakness to take advantage of opportunity: Address this weakness that the product is not patentable, and take advantage of the large Japanese market opportunity by developing a fully customized Japanese product line and brand personality. This will discourage local competition.

        * ST(3): Utilize strength to address or mitigate threats: Utilize product innovation culture to develop a line of flexible use, small package products that address the space limitations of the Japanese market, then utilize international experience and channels to sell this line in Europe

        * ST(4): Address weaknesses to address or mitigate threats: Hire japanese sales representatives to develop their own distribution network in Japan, and utilize this network to address the threat of Japanese retailers being more relationship oriented. Consider partnering in this endeavour with a large retailer to limit strategic exposure with japanese toy manufacturers.





* **Differentiation is how a brand will be known to its customers as being better than competitive brands.** A discussion of differentiation should be specific. It is not meaningful to say that an organization will differentiate itself on quality. **What does that mean in your specific context? For a car it could mean greater reliability, durability, longevity, rust protection, or more comfortable seats, among many other considerations. For a restaurant it could mean better taste, greater variety, better ingredients, faster service, or better ambiance, among other considerations. You need to be specific in identifying what your organization will do better than others.**
* Defendability discusses sources of **sustainable competitive advantage and the systems, competencies, technology, or other resources that enable an organization to defend its chosen positioning.** it is important to understand that the underlying goal of all marketing strategies and plans is to create a competitive advantage for the firm--to take what the company does really well and outperform the competition, thus providing customers with a benefit the competition can not provide. A competitive advantage gives consumers a reason to choose one product over another again and again.
* Finally, brand personality is a discussion of how the intended differentiation will be captured in the creation of brand meaning. Some brands, like the Apple Macintosh, have clear personalities. Imagine that Apple Macintosh was a person and he or she just walk into the room. Describe him or her in as much detail as possible. You can do that quite easily because Apple has spent considerable money developing the mac Guy versus PC Guy series or advertisements (which can be found on its website: www.apple.com). In defining a brand personality we specify what personality we are seeking to support the overall positioning of the brand. This personality gets developed in the marketing mix decisions that we subsequently make.

#### marketing Mix: Create the Value
* As outlined in Chapter 1, a mareting plan then describes the marketing mix decision related to product, price, channel of distribution, and marketing communication. Rationale for these decisions come from your SWOT and other analysis, your understanding of your target market profile, and the marketing theory, principles, and concepts that you will learn from reading this text and attending class.

#### Evaluation and Implementation
* Also as outlined in Chapter 1, **the collective decisions represented in a marketing plan need to be evaluated to determine if the strategy should be implemented.** **Throughout the writting of a marketing plan, rationale is provided for each decision made using your situational analysis, target market profile, and marketing theory, concepts, and principles**. Collectively, however, the set of decisions need to create superior customer value and achieve the organization's objectives, and marketers need to be confident that they have devised the most appropriate strategy given their circumstances. To make the overall recommendation to implement the marketing plan, financial analysis and cost-benefit analysis are required. Financial analysis involves developing projected (pro-forma) financial statements, such as a pro-forma income statement and balance sheet, and sometimes a cash flow statement or a statement of sources and uses of funds. Financial analysis might also include ratio analysis--a comparison of key figures in the financial statements. 
* Cost-benefit analyseis, as the name implies, is an analysis of all the advantages and disadvantages of implementing a partciular course of action. Simple cost-benefit analysis involves a judgment-based (qualitative) assessment of the net benefit (advanatges relate to disadvantages) of one course of action relative to alternatives. More sophisticated cost-benefit analysis involves assigning numerical values to (qualifying) the costs and benefits and then using a decision rule of formulae to calculate the net benefit of each alternative. This more sophisticated approach allows the analyst to assign different levels of importance (weights) to different costs and benefits, but it can sometimes be very difficult to assign a numerical value to some costs and benefits. For example, how might a reasonable numeric value be assigned to the potential loss of life from a poorly designed child's toy, or the potential damage to an ecosystem from batteries that are not recycled?
* Finally, if all of the above-metnioned analyses lead to a positive recommendation to implement a particular strategy, a marketing plan then outlines how the strategy will be implemented, including action plans for the marketing mix elements; responsibilities and time lines (who is going to do what, by when); the budget and how the budget will be allocated by activity; and plans to monitor and measure the results of the strategy implementation, with contingency plans if benchmarks (targets) are not met. Unless already specified as part of the marketing mix, this section of the plan would also specify how exchange relationships will be initiated and managed. This topic will be explored further in Chapter 5 and 6.
* finally, a marketing plan typically includes a set of exhibits that provide details taht support the recommendations made in the body of the plan. These exhibits include the SWOT analysis, detailed market segment profiles, and a pro-forma income statement that shows the forecast sales volume and revenue and identifies the key expenses, as per the proposed marketing budget. Positioning map (described in Chapter 3) are lso often included to illustrate the relative positioning of an organization's brand(s).


READ TO PAGE 56