# Social Media Marketing

# Chapter 1: The Social Media Environment

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
* When you finish reading this chapter, you will be able to answer these questions:
1. What are social media? How are social media similar to, yet different from, traditional media?
2. How does the Social Media Value Chain explain the relationships among the Internet, social media channels, social software, and the Internet-enabled devices we use for access and participation?
3. What are the major zones of social media that make up the channels, modes, and vehicles for social media participation?
4. What is social media marketing? What marketing objectives can organizations meet when they incorporate social media in their marketing mix?

## IT's A SOCIAL WORLD
* When you woke up this morning, what was the first thing you did? Sure, you may have taken a moment to gulp down some juice or coffee, but odds are you also checked your mobile for texts that came in overnight. Maybe you set you Snapchat Story. Perhaps you scrolled through a few tweets or checked WhatsApp. You certainly aren't along: one survey of people from 31 countries reported 96% of them use their smartphone within an hour of waking up, often before they get out of bed.
* Face it--you're a digital native. If you're a typical student, you probably can't recall a time when the Internet was just a static, one-way platform that transmitted text and a few sketchy images. The term digital native originated in a 2001 article by Marc Prensky (2001) titled "Digital natives, digital immigrants." He tried to explain a new type of student who was starting to enter educational institutions. These students--students like you--were born in an era in which digital technology has always existed. You and your fellow digital natives grew up "wired" in a highly networked, always-on world. It's an exciting time--but it continues to change so constantly that we need to study it carefully.
* Today the Internet is the backbone of our society. Widespread access to connected devices like personal computers, digital video and audio recorders, webcams, smartphones, and wearables like smartwatches ensures that consumers who live in virtually any part of the world can create and share content. Worldwide, there are about 4.38 billion global Internet users today--that's roughly 57% of the world's population. Most Internet users, about 45% of the world's population, are active on at least one social network. That's about 3.5 billion people. Of course, social media penetration does vary by global region, with the lowest penetration rates reported in Central Asia, Africa, and South Asia. Even these areas are expected to experience growth, at least in part due to Internet access via mobile phone. Mobile penetration is 67% worldwide and 63% of mobile users are active on social media via mobile applications. Curious about social media usage in a specific country? We Are Social, a global social media marketing agency, provides data on every country in the world in its Digital Yearbook. Odds are you already participate in this wired world.
* Information doesn't just flow from big companies or governments down to the rest of us; today each of us communicates with huge numbers of people by a click on a keypad, so information flows across people as well. The fundamental change in the way we live, work, and play is characterized in part by the prevalence of social media. **Social media are the online means of communication, conveyance, collaboration, and cultivation among interconnected and interdependent networks of people, communities, and organizations enhanced by technological capabilities and mobility.** Does that sound like a complex definition? It is...because social media exist within a complex and rapidly advancing environment. We'll dive deep into the social media environment, but first let's explore the making of a social media life--your life.

## LIVING A SOCIAL (MEDIA) LIFE
* The Internet and its related technologies make what we know today as social media possible and prevalent. Every day the influence of social media expands as more people join online communities. The average Internet user has accounts within eight different social media services and spend more than two hours a day on social media. Facebook, a social utility that offers synchronous interactions (which occur in real time, such as when you text back and forth with a friend) and asynchronous interactions (which don't require all participants to respond immediately, such as when you email a friend and get an answer the next day), content sharing of images, video, music, games, applications, groups, and more, has at the time of writing more than 2.2 billion active users worldwide. What's more--more than 1 billion of those users are mobile users. If Facebook were a country, it would be the most populated in the world. Do you wonder why Facebook is called a social utility? A community that got its start as a social network, Facebook offers functionality far beyond basic relationship building. It not only competes with social channels ranging from video and photo sharing to blogs; its Facebook Live, Marketplace, and Campaign ensure it competes with e-commerce sites, news sources, and other advertising media channels. Facebook also owns the top two social messaging services, WhatsApp and Facebook Messanger, as well as the top photo- and video- sharing network, Instagram.
* people aren't just joining social communities. They are contributing, too! Let's take Youtube as an example. Youtube users (Youtube has around 2 billion users) upload more than 300 hours of video every single minute of every day. That's roughly equivalent to 1,500,000 full-length movies uploaded weekly. Youtube hosts local versions in more than 100 countries and users can navigate Youtube in 80 different langues. It's perhaps not surprising then to learn that Youtube users watch more than a billion hours of video each day (and more tahn half watch on mobile devices). Google the phrase "social media stats" and you'll see mind-boggling facts and figures about the number of people who use social media, what they're doing (and when) with social media, and their reach and influence. This has been done for you in Table 1.1. And take a look at Figure 1.1 an infographic that highlights fun facts about some of the most popular social sites.

        Table 1.1: Mind-Boggling Social Media Stats
        * It took radio 38 years to reach 50 million listeners. TV took 13 years to reach 50 million users. The Internet took 4 years to reach 50 million people. In less than 9 months, Facebook added 100 million users
        * Just over 13% of Facebook users are in North America; more than a third of users are in the Asia Pacific region
        * More than 90% of companies use Linkedin as their primary recruiting tool
        * The top Youtuber, like PewDiePie and Lily Singh, earn millions of dollars each year
        * Generation X (ages 35-49) spend the most time on social media--6 hours and 58 minutes per week. Millennials (age 18-34) come in second, spending 6 hours and 19 minutes of their time per week on social networks
        * Two-thirds of Internet users worldwide use social media
        * While Facebook dominates in size and penetration worldwide, Instagram dominates in user engagement. Brands see a median engagement of 0.09% per Facebook post, in comparison of 1.60% median engagement rate per post on Instagram 
        * QQ, Webchat, and Qzone, social networks with heavy user bases in Asia, are more popular than Tumblr, Instagram, Twitter, and Pinterest

* When we introduce the definition of social media earlier, we admitted it's a complicated idea. It's difficult to fully capture the realm of social media because of the expansive nature of sites, services, and behaviours that are a part of this rapidly expanding digital universe. There are simply too many social websites, too many things we can do online, and increasing access using a variety of devices to grasp it all at once.
* More generally, however, we can think of social media as the way digital natives live a social life. To sum thigns up, it's all about a culture of participation; a belief in democracy; the ability to freely interact with other people, companies, and organizations; open access to venues that allow users to share content, fromm simple comment to reviews, ratings, photos, stories, and more; and the powr to build on the content of others from your own unique point of view. Here's just a brief look at some of the things you might do with social media:

* Share and document an event using live video.
* Watch television while discussing the program on social media.
* Create a blog to share your favorite recipes
* Coordinate a book club meeting and negotiate a group discount on the book's purchase price
* Mobilize a group of people to protest against an unpopular policy on your campus
* Instant message or voice chat with friends to carry on a synchronous conversation online.
* Share an infographic with your friends.
* Locate the best vegan restaurant in a city you're visting for the first time based upon reviews by other vegans
* Make your own animated video and share it
* Keep a travel diary of a trip abroad complete with photos , videos, journal entries, and destination ratings.
* Raise money for a charity or even find backers for a startup company who are willing to fund part of your costs.
* Find people you use to know and reconnect with them.
* Entertain yourself and your friends with short social games

* The list could go on and on. Our point? Social media enable active participation in the form of communicating, creating, joining, collaborating, working, sharing, socializing, playing, buying, and selling, and learning within interactive and interdependent networks. Thus, social media are interactive and participartory. It's an exciting time to be around!
* While social media users have embraced social media, its infrastructure has developed in ways that have made social media pervasive and ubiquitous. Social media intersects with websites, platforms, and media devices. The result is that people today live in what can be thought of as an omnisocial world.

## THE INFRASTRUCTURE OF SOCIAL MEDIA
* The environment of social media is like a volcano that suddenly erupts within warning. Within a few short years we've seen an ever-expanding domin of activities, channels, technologies, and devices that are changing how we think about our lives (e.g., in the old days a "friend" was someone you actually knew in person!) As a student of social media marketing, recognizing the parameters of the field and how the pieces of the puzzle fit together will benefit you as you develop skill as devising social media strategies and tactics. The Social media Value Chain, shown in Figure 1.2, organizes this complex environment into its core components.

        Figure 1.2
        * Infrastructure
        * Channels/Hosts
        * Supporting Software and Services
        * Devices
        * Share-Create-Talk-Work-Buy/Sell-Learn

* The value chain illustrates the core activites of social media participants and the components that make those activities possible. As a social media user, you are empowered to participate in any way you'd like, from just "lurking" on a site to scripting, filming, and uploading your own video stories. Those activities are made possible by the underlying infrastructure of social media's techno-social system. just as in the physical world where we need infrastructure in the form of roads, railroads, TV transmitters, and trained people to operate and maintain these structures, in digital environments the pieces that make up the social web are crucial. These include the web, the social channels and vehicles, the software that provides the programming we need in order to carry out these activites, the device (iPad, smartphones, computers) we use, and of course the parcipants--the people and organizations whose contribution porvide the content we all access. Let's take a closer look at each of these elements.

## THE WEB AS PLATFORM
* Just as the Internet is a foundation for the web, the web is the foundation for social media. Because social media are not possible without this infrastructure, it is the first supporting component we identify in the Social Media Value Chain. To put it simply, the Internet is a network of connected data servers. Initially, th web (what we now call Web 1.0) was a network of connected information. People browsing the Internet were merely consumers of the Internet's most static contents. Web 1.0 was the era of cognition, in which a network of data producers served information to primarily passive consumers. Web 2.0 marked a major shift by connecting networks of people in addition to networks of information. Tim O'Reilly (2005), founder of O'Reilly media and the first to define Web 2.0 explained Web 2.0 as "development in online technoology that **enable interactive capabilities in an environment characterized by user control, freedom, and dialogue."** Web 2.0 offered a cost-effective solution that provides access to rich data; the collective wisdom of its users, access to micromarkets; software that operates on multiple platforms (mobile phone, personal digital assistant, computer) and beyond (cloud computing); and user interaces that are easy, accessbile, and interactive.
* From these advances blossomed the "social web" and an era of communication, in which networks of networked communities have members who participate as consumers, creators, and co-creators. Each additional user adds value for all users. Economists refer to this as a **network effect**. Amazon's ability to recommend books to you based upon what other people with similar interests bought in the past gets better as it tracks more and more people who enter search queries and make purchases. When you're visiting a new city and want to find a great restaurant on Yelp, you feel more comfortable with a place that 1000 diners recommend than one that only ten users rate. You get more value from Facebook as more of your friends also use the network. Network effects enable organizations to leverage the value of **crowdsourcing**, a process that harnesses the collective knowledge of a large group of people to solve problems and complete tasks. Organizations use crowdsourcing to benefit from the collective wisdom of crowds, but the network effect ensures that there is sufficient participation for the crowdsourced solution to be a good one.
* Web 3.0, the **Semantic Web**, is the expected next stage. First envisioned by Tim Berners-Lee, this iteration of the web makes it possible for people and machines to collaborate. The web will be a universal medium for data, information, and knowledge exchange. It will mark an era of collaboration--not only of people, but also of people and machine. In other words, devices (yes, machines) will be contextually, socially, and network aware and be able to dynamically create social connections between each other and connected people in order to offer services to each other and to jointly solve problems. In other words, social media will eventually serve to support **collective intelligence**. while some elements of Web 3.0 exist--especially the presence of services made possible by social software, the capture of user-generated data, and the mining and processing of the data--it is not yet fully realized. We remain in a stage known as Web 2.x.

## SOCIAL CHANNELS
* Social channels are the networks and platforms that support social media functionality and connections. We cover these in the section of the Zones of Social Media

## SOCIAL SOFTWARE
* So far we've learned that the social media environment supports many activities. But much of our experiences and what we are able to create or do online is due to a host of **social software** applications. These are computer programs that enable users to interact, create, and share data online. For virtually everything you'd like to do online, there is a social software program (or several) that can help you. **Interested in planning an event? Use an event planner and invitation service like eVite.com.** Want to keep a notebook of wedding ideas that you can share with your bridesmaids? use Evernote.com, or create a board of hot new wedding gown styles on Pinterest (watch out for those hideous bridemaids' dresses). Need to keep a new feed of all the latest happenings at your school? Use Paper.li or Google Alerts. Want to create an e-book to share on Linkedin? Use Designerr. Social software can facilitate interation, content creation, sharing, syndicating, saving, analyzing, filtering, sorting, and searching data online. Such tools are certainly useful to individuals, communities, entrepreneurs, and businesses. Examples include mixir (for producing live radio shows and podcasts), Xtranormal (for video production), and Prezi (for presentation).
* You've heard of the phrase "There's an app for that!" It's no wonder given that there are currently more than 1.2 billion apps available through digital stores like Google Play. Those apps, also known as widgets (usually downloadable or embeddable), are types of social software. In addtion to apps, social software also encompasses application service sites that we call social services. Importantly, social sofware exist to facilitate all social media channels. There are applications for social community activities, publishing, entertainment, and commerce. Importantly, these apps largely enable mobile connectivity to our social spaces and activities. Blurring things further, open application programming interface (APIs) and other platform technologies have enabled countless third-party websites to integrate with social network sites. A more recent development is the chatbot, an artificial intelligence computer software program that simulates intelligent conversation via written or spoken text using a chat interface, such as Facebook Messanger or Webchat. Chatbot can provide a number of conversational services ranging from functional to fun.
* Social software also operates behind the scenes in ways that affect your social media experience. Social sites use complex mathematical formulas called algorithms to personalize the content you see in your news feed, recommend friends connections, and more. Dominique Cardon, author of What Are Algorithm Dreaming of? likens algorithms to a recipe in that they are a series of instructions that produce a desired result. When you browse nearby restaurants on your phone, view movie recommendations on Netflix, or check Youtube on how-to videos, algorithms likely played a role in the outcome.

## DEVICE
* Devices are pieces of equipment we use to access the Internet and the range of activities in which we participate online. We utilize connected hardware devices like tablet PCs, smartphones, smartwatches, Internet-connected game consoles, traditional laptops and desktops, and even televisions for social media access. As a consumer, we may focus primarily on connected devices like smartphones and other smart devices, especially those that provide mobile access to social media. Globally, 93.4% of social media users participate using a mobile device. Today's smart devices also include refrigerators, thermostats, and even cars. Wearables are smart devices that can be carried or worn on one's body. They measure and capture data, which can then be stored, shared, and further processed. Fitness wearbles like Fitbit, which measure activity levels and share the information with online communities, have experienced the most adoption thus far, but they represent a small portion of wearable devices. For instance, Snapchat Spectators, camera-equipped sunglasses, enable users to take video and upload it to Snapchat with the touch of a button.
* Even devices that aren't "smart" on their own can become so by using an Internet of Things gateway. The Internet of Things (IoT) refers to a paradigm in which all the object around us could be connected anytime and anywhere. Gateways are devices that can facilitate connection for objects without network capabilities. So far most applications are industrial, but expect to see consumer applications in surprising areas. Absolut, the vodka company, is experimenting with manufacturing its bottles as IoT-enabled objects! Smart devices are a first step in the evolution toward connecting machines as users, alongside people in social media. Ultimately, social connection among machines will transform them from passive data-collecting devices into active members of a thriving digital ecosystem, capable of creating social connections, solving problems, and offering services.

## PEOPLE
* Social media work only when people participate, create, and share content. Journalists, editors, and publishers still matter in social media, but so do every day individuals. You see this visualized in Figure 1.2 as a series of activities typical in social media participation. This is why we hear so much about citizen journalists (amateurs who post about newsworthy events) and citizen advertisers (people who share their iews about a product or service even though they're not affiliated with the company). Bloggers represent a unique hybrid form of "netizens" in that they may create and share content professionally or personally. Publishing a blog is surely a bigger commitment to sharing content than is posting a status update to your Facebook wall, but both actions generate content and add value to the social media environment. Still, people aren't the only actors in social media. As a techno-social system, other participants include businesses and brands, government organizations, community groups, media companies, content producers, and so on.
* Our coverage of the Social media Value Chain isn't complete without a review of social channels and related vehicles in and through which social media participation takes place. We address these channels, known as the zones of social media, next.

## CHANNELS: THE ZONES OF SOCIAL MEDIA
* The word media has multiple meanings, but for our purposes we'll simply use it to refer to means of communication. The media we use range from ass media (means of communication that can reach a large number of individuals) such as broadcast, print, and digital channels, to personal media (channels capable of two-way communication on a small scale) such as email, surface mail, telephone, and face-to-face conversations. Social media cross the boundaries of mass and personal media, so they enable individual to communicate with one or a few people as well as to thousands or even millions of others.
* Communication travels using a medium (or channel) such as **word of mouth, television, radio, newspaper, magazine, signage, Internet, direct mail, or telephone**. Within each medium, marketers can choose specific **vehicles** to place a message. For example, within the medium of television, marketers may choose Stranger Things as one vehicle to broadcast their message. Cosmopolitan and Fast cmopany are vehicles for the magazine medium. Social media are socially enabled online channels, and like other media, there are numerous vehicles within each channel.
* Part of the comlexity of social media is due to the sheer quantity of channels and vehicles, with new ones coming online all the time. These options are easier to compare and contrast if we group similar channels together. In so doing we can conveniently organize the social media space into a compact space that consists of what we call the four zones of social media. Figure 1.3 illustrates the four zones of social media channels, and we've organized the book around these groupings:

        * Zone 1 is Social Community: Sharing, socializing, conversing
        * Zone 2 is social publishing: Editorial, Commercial, User-Generated
        * Zone 3 is Social Entertainment: Games, Music, Art
        * Zone 4 is Social Commerce: CRM/Service, Retailing/Sales, Human Resources

* You'll note, as we discuss various uses of social media for personal and commercial purposes, that some areas overlap two or even more zones. That's the fluid nature of social media. All social media are networked around relationships, technologically enabled, and based on the principles of shared participation. The four zones framework isn't set in stone for this reason--but it is a very useful way to cut through the clutter and focus upon the most important functions of each social media platform--including those that haven't been invented yet.

## ZONE 1: SOCIAL COMMUNITY
* Social commmunities describe channels of social media that focus upon relationships and the common activities people participate in with others who share the same interest or identification. Thus, social communities feature two-way and multi-way communication, conversation, collaboration, and the sharing of experience and resources. **All social media channels are built around networked relationships, but for social communities the interaction and collaboration for relationship building and maintenance are the primary reasons people engage in these actiivities.** Many of the channels in which you already participate likely reside in this first zone. The channels in the social community zone include social network sites, message boards and forums, and wikis. All emphasize individual contributions in the context of a community, communication and conversation, and collaboration.
* Social network sites (SNS) are online hosts that enable site members to construct and maintain profiles, identify other members with whom they are connected, and participate by consuming producing, and/or interacting with content provided by their connecctions. Profile picture enhance the ability of members to develop a **social identity** when they add a prfoile picture or avatar, basic information about themselves, and other customizable options. Members maintain a **social presence** in the community that may indicate their availability, mood, friend list, and status. **Connections**, whom we might call *friends, followers, or fans,* communicate and share content in a vareity of ways, including direct messages (akin to email within the social network site), wall posts (post to a profile, visble to others), and chat or instant messaging (IM) options. Thus, SNS offer both synchronous and asynchronous forms of communication, and the resulting content may be either permanent or temporary. Snapchat's popularity is largely attributed to its disappearing messages. SNS add value to users by offering and/or enabling applications. Facebook offers thousands of apps, ranging from games to dating to weather forecasts to safety check-ins. Though the services provided by app functionalities heighten user engagement, the focus of SNS is on the individual communication and collaboration within the context of connections in the community. We'll delve deeper into these characteristics and uses of SNS and social communities in Chapter 6.
* Given the dominance of Facebook and other major players, it's easer to assume that there are only a small number of social networks. In fact, there are hundreds of SNS vehicles. But are you familiar with Steemit, DriveTribe, Whisper, Houzz, or Thumb? SNS exist to meet the needs of their users and many provide niche communities.
* **Forum** are perhaps the oldest venue of social media. Essentially, they are interactive, online versions of community bulletin boards. They focus entirely on discussions among members. Members establish profiles as they do in SNS and participate by posing content including questions, opinions, news, and photos. Others then respond and extend conversation as they post responses; this results in a threaded discussion. There are thousands upon thousands of forums active online, most oriented around a common interest. For example, RC Universe (www.rcuniverse.com) is a vibrant community of remote-control hobbyists.
* **Wikis** are collaborative online workspaces that enable community members to contribute to the creation of a useful and shared resource. Wikis can be about anything and everything. A wiki could be created by a family community to share and update family history, or by an appliance manufacturer that is trying to develop the perfect user manual. The software that supports the wiki enables multiple members to collaborate, edit, make comments, and share a variety of content.

## ZONE 2: SOCIAL PUBLISHING
* **Social publishing** is the production and issuance of content for distribution via social publishing sites. Social publishing sites aid in the dissemination of content to an audience by hosting content while also enabling audience participation and sharing. While social networks met the need for online communities, social publishing made it possible for people to share their content, user-generated content (UGC), without the barriers and gatekeeping of traditional publishing and broadcast models. It is a key reason we associate social media with democracy in that social publishing democratized content production and dissemination. That said, today, individual users are not the only social publishers. Professional content creators like journalists, traditional media organizations like newspapers, and brands develop content for and publish on social publishing sites. We categorize social publisers into four use group: 1) individual users, 2) independent professionals, 3) professional contributors associated with organizations such as news media, and 4) brands. Brand use social publishing as a distribution and/or promotion mode in **content marketing** campaign. (Content Marketing Institute)
* The channels of social publishing that we will feature in Chapter 7 include blogs, microsharing sites, media-sharing sites, and social bookmarking, and news sites. Social publishing channels enable participation and sharing, just as social communities do. The distnction between these two zones is in the primary orientation. **The orientation of social communities is networking, while that of social publishing is knowledge-sharing.**
* **Blogs** are websites that host regularly updated online content; they may include text, graphics, audio, and video. Blogs may be maintained by individuals, journalists, traditional media providers, or organizations, so they feature a wide range of topics. Thus, there are blogs that operate much like an online news source or magazine, a tabloid, or simply as an online personal diary. Blogs are social because they offer social share tools, and they are participatory because they include option for readers to leave comments that can result in threaded discussions related to specific posts. Several services are available for formatting and hosting, including Blogger, Wordpress, Squarespace and Weebly.
* **Microsharing sites**, also called microblogging sites, work much like blogs except that there is a limit to the length of the content you can post. A **microshare** could include a sentence, sentence fragment, embedded video, or link to content residing on another site. Twitter, the most well-known microsharing vehicle, limits post to 140 characters. Others include Plurk and Parler.
* **Media-sharing sites**, like blogs, host content but also typically feature video, audio (music and podcasts), photos, and presentation and documents rather than text or a mix of media. Media-sharing sites host content searchable by the masses, but within each vehicle are options for following content posted by specific people. Thus, media-sharing sites are also networked. Here are some prominent vehicles within different types of media

        * Blogging: Tumblr, Blogger, Wordpress
        * Video Sharing: YouTube, Vimeo, and Vsnap
        * Photo sharing: Flickr, Snapfish, and Instagram
        * Music and audio sharing: Audiofarm, and Soundcloud
        * Presentations and documents: Scribd, SlideShare, SplashCast, BrightTalk, and SlideBoom.
        * Social bookmarking services (i.e., sharing links to other sites): Diigo and Digg

## ZONE 3: SOCIAL ENTERTAINMENT
* The zone of **social entertainment** encompasses events, performances, and activities designed to provide the audience with pleasure and enjoyment, experienced and shared using social media. The distinction between the zones of social publishing and social entertainment is the orientation: knowledge-sharing versus entertainment-sharing. The topic of Chapter 8, these include social games, social music, video and social television. The social media channels supporting this zone include communities dedicated to entertainment like Spotify and TikTok, as well as multi-zone social networks like Youtube and Instagram. At this stage in the development of social media, **social games** constitute by a substantious margin the most advanced channel in the social entertainment zone. These are hosted online and include opportunities for interaction with members of a player's network as well as the ability to **statuscast** (post updates to one's status) activities and gaming accomplishments to online profiles. Examples of social game vehicles include Candy Crush and Mafia Wars.

## ZONE 4: SOCIAL COMMERCE
* Our fourth zone is **social commerce**. The topic of Chapter 9, social commerce refers to the use of social media in the online shopping, buying, and selling of products and services. Social commerce encompasses social shopping, social marketplaces, and hybrid channels and tools that enable shared participation in a buying decision. Thus, social commerce enables people, both networks of buyers and sellers, to participate actively in the marketing and selling of products and services in online marketplaces and communities. **social shopping** is the active participation and influence of others on a consumer's decision-making process, typically in the form of opinions, recommendations, and experiences shared via social media. Channels include reviews and ratings (or review sites like Yelp or branded e-commerce sites), **deal sites** (like Groupon), **deal aggregators** (aggregate deals into personalized deal feeds), **social shopping markets** (online malls featuring user-recommended products, reviews, and the ability to communicate with friends while shopping like Wanelo), **social storefronts** (online retail stores that sometimes operate within a social site like Facebook with social capabilities), community marketplaces (peer-to-peer sites like Etsy), and social networks with sales conversion functionality. In addition, organizations can socially enable aspects of their traditional e-commerce websites by using tools such as **Facebook Connect** (a Facebook tool that allows users to log in to other partnering sites using their Facebook identities) and **share applications** (tools that let users share what they are buying). Figure 1.4 illustrates the four zones of social media along with several vehicles prevalent in each zone at this time.

        * Social Community: Twitter, facebook, linkedin, reddit, instagram
        * Social publishing: Blogger, Tumblr, Wordpress, Medium, Youtube, SmugMug, SlideShare, Scribd
        * Social Commerce: Facebook, Shopify, Groupon, Etsy, VideoGenie, TripAdvisor, Payvment
        * Social Entertainment: Come2Play, Spotify, DevianArt, youtube, mySpace, Zynga, uGame

        MY:
        * Social community: Reddit, 
        * Social publishing: linkedin, medium, Youtube
        * Social commerce: Facebook,
        * Social Entertainment: Youtube

## MONETIZATION AND SOCIAL MEDIA
* As wired individuals, we've come to rely on many of the social sites and services and available online. And for marketers, social media have created one of the most exciting and efficient opportunities to reach target audiences. But have you ever thought about how those social sites earn revenue? Most sites still feature free access and a buffet of valuable tools and services. Yet those organizations have invested in potentially extensive development costs and time, hosting costs, and ongoing maintenance. Though it's standard business practice to invest capital to pave the way for future profitability, how do these organizations earn revenue if many of  the platforms are free to use?

### BUSINESS MODELS AND MONETIZATION
* Just like other businesses, social media providers (whether they are social communities, utilities, software providers, or game and app developers) need a **monetization strategy**. **Monetization** refers to how a business earns revenue. It must make money if it is to survive. if a system requires substantial new investment as users adopt it, the break-even point for return on investment (ROI) is delayed even as it appears to be a success. This plan is part of a company's overall **business model**--the strategy and format it follows to earn money and provide value to its stakeholders. For example, Google derives most of the revenue from its widely used search engine (where you "google" a term to locate relevant online links) from the fees it charges advertisers to put their messages on the results pages. In contrast, eBay makes most of its money by taking a cut of the proceeds each time a seller fulfills an order from a buyer on its merchandse pages. Two different business models, both ways to return value to the sponsoring organization.
* For decades now, media providers (e.g., the big networks, ABC, NBC, CBS, and Fox) and media conglomerates (e.g, Disney, Viacom, and Time Warner) have relied heavily on a business model we call the **interruption-disruption model**. The goal is to create programming that is interesting enough  to attract people to watch it or listen to it. Then, when they have your attention, they interrupt the programming to bring you a commercial message. They sell ad space to marketers who want to gain the attention of a targeted audience, and the audience allows this to happen in return for access to programming they want. The monetization strategy relies upon attracting as many people as possible to the content; the more who pay attention (or who at least tune in even though they may not be paying attention), the more the programmer can charge for the right to insert messages in that vehicle.
* Many social media sites still use this same strategy of earning revenues from selling ad space (Did you notice the text ads delivered alongside your Facebook news feed today?). Though some companies have other revenue stream (or source of income), typically through subscriptions to premium versions or fees for data, these are unlikely to replace the model of "adspace as revenue". Despite the value of services and content found online, the culture of the web is one of open and free access..
* Because social media are built on participation, and the more content, the better, people's contributions also have value. Should you have to pay for online content? Believe it or not, way back in the old days (i.e., before 1999) it never occured to consumers that they should not pay for content. That's when a college student named Shawn Fanning introduced the Napster site that enabled music lovers to share tracks for free. That party lasted only two years before legalities caught up with the service, but by then the cat was out of the bag. Now, many people (not to point fingers, but especially college students) believe that "information wants to be free", and they gravitate toward technology that enables them to download songs, newspaper, and yes, even textbook without cost.
* As attractive as that sounds, in the long run an entirely free world probably isn't feasibly. Remember the old expression, "there's no such thing as a free lunch?" At the end of the day, someone has to pay for content and services. Music artists and novelists (and yes, even textbook authors) can't create and receive nothing in return (for long, anyways). However, the restarant review on Yelp you won't get a check in the mail for your comments. But you may get "paid" by the satisfaction of sharing your foodie opinions with the uneducated masses. You may even receive a rating on some sites that designates you as a star reviewer. These are forms of **psychic income** (perceived value that is not expressed in monetary form) that help to grease the wheel of social media. Also referred to as **social currency**, people and brands need to earn a reputation for providing high value--whether that value comes from information, relevance, and/or entertainment.

## SOCIAL MEDIA MARKETING
* Social media are a valuable context for marekting because of their access to people and their functionality. According to the American Marketing Association, **marketing** is the activity, set of institutions, and processes for creating, communicating, delivering, and exchanging offers that have value for customers, clients, partners, and society at large. The classic view is that organizations accomplish these goals through a **marketing mix** that includes the so-called Four Ps: Product, Price, Promotion, and Place (or distribution).
* As social media marketing techniques continue to sprout around us, today we need to add another P. Participation. It's fair to say that just as social media are changing the way consumers live on a daily basis, so too these new platforms transform how marketers go about their business. Whether our focus is to improve customer service, maintain customer relationships, inform consumers of our benefits, promote a brand or related special offer, develop a new product, or influence brand attitudes, new social media options play a role. **Social media marketing** is the utilization of social media technologies, channels, and software to create, communicate, deliver, and exchange offerings that have value for an organization's stakeholders. We can see this definition play out in emerging trends in social media. While social media marketing initially influenced brands' promotional plans, more recent business applications include social funding (e.g., Kickstarter for funding new business ventures).

### MARKETING COMMUNICATION: FROM TOP-DOWN TO BOTTOM UP
* Just as the horizontal revolution changed the way society communicates, the advent and adoption of social media change the way brands and consumers interact. Traditional marketing focuses on **push messaging** (one-way communication delivered to the target audience) using a large dose of broadcast and print media to reach a mass audience. There are minimal opportunities for interaction and feedback between customers and the organization, and **boundary spanners** (employees who interact directly with customers) mediate these dialogues. The brand message is controlled in a top-down manner by brand leadership within the organization.
* Even as digital technology developed in the 1990s and beyond, marketers still eseentially applied the traditional Four Ps model to reach customers. Over time they embraced the Internet as an environment for promotion and distribution. Ecommerce began to blossom as an alternative to other forms of promotion such as television, or radio. Consumers increasingly began to learn about product online--and to purchase them online as well. Ecommerce sites are websites that allow customers to examine (onscreen) different brands and to conduct transactions via credit card.
* This explosion in ecommerce activity was a boon to manufacturers, retailers, and nonprofit organizations because it offered greater speed, cost efficiencies, and access to micromarkets. A **micromarket** is a group of consumers once considered too small and inaccessible for marketers to pursue. Suddenly it became feasible for even a small company that offered a limited inventory to reach potential customers around the globe. The Internet enables efficient access to these markets, and in turn allows customers to search for very specialized products (e.g., music tracks by bands that recorded bass line music in Sheffield, England, between 2002 and 2005, or steampunk science fiction novels written by K.W. Jeter) to offer **niche products** that appeal to small, specialized groups of people.
* As it became clear that the Internet was not going to go away, marketers flocked to cyberspace. however, most of them still applied the familiar model of the Four Ps to the digital domain. This form of marketing, **traditional marketing**, is characterized by improvements in interactivity and measurement, but it retains the primary vertical flow of power in the channels of communication and distribution. Digital online messages made it possible for consumers to respond directly to an online **display ad** by clicking through to the ecommerce website. **Search advertising** grew during this time too, making it possible for online advertising to target both mass and miche audiences. Direct marketers widely adopted email marketing as a complement to direct mail and telemarketing.
* Despite these developments, modes of communication were still primarily vertical, one-way "mass communication", largely impersonal, and delivered from one to many. Whether you read the front page of the New York Times online at www.nytimes.com, or the new York Times app on your phone, or peruse the physical newspaper at your kitchen table, the content from the publisher is delivered vertically thorugh the channel of communication.
* Both traditional and tradigital marketing work on the basis of teh interruption-disruption model we discussed earlier. This means that the source of a communication delivers messages to audiences whether or not they want to receive them, and regardless or whether these messages are directly relevant to their unique needs. By design, an advertising message interrupts some prior activity: a commercial for L'Oreal mascara suddenly appears during the lastest episode of Real housewives, or perhaps a popup buble asks you to click on a link to learn more about low rates on car insurance while you browse a website.
* Why would Internet users tolerate these disruptions as they surf the web? For the same reason television viewers and radio listeners have for decades. The ad as interruption that provides a stream of revenue for the media provider also enables this sponsor to provide the content of interest at little or not cost to the audience. Television programming exists to draw audiences, which enables the network to sell space to advertisers who wish to reach that audience. The audience in turn accepts the presence of the advertising who wish to reach that audience. The audience in turn accepts  the presence of the advertising in order to consume the desired programming. This "you scratch my back and I'll scratch yours" relationship also describes the traditional Internet advertising: before you can watch a full episode of the Walking Dead on your laptop, you might sit through a 15 second ad for Verizon Wireless.
* In contrast, social media empower consumers. it isn't enough to interrupt the consumer experience and steal a few moments of attention. With social media marketing, the ability for consumers to interact and engage with brands is greatly enhanced. Social media channels give consumers unparalleled access. Consumers discuss, contribute, collaborate, and share--with brands and with each other. The culture of marketing has shifted to an informal one focused on the belief that customers are in control. Marketing guru Peter Drucker once famously said, "The purpose of a business is to create a customer". With the reach and community influence of social media, we can expand this definition: The purpose of a business is to create customers who create other customers. That participation in the process is the new fifth P of marketing.
* In the few years of social media's existence, social media marketing has expanded rapidly, as much for its efficiency given its low absolute as for its potential business applications as a tool for garnering customer attention, managing customer relationships, developing new product ideas, promoting brands, driving store (online and offline) traffic, and converting consumers to customers. Social media are not a substitute for traditional marketing communications, but they are more than a complement to traditional methods, as you'll see throughout this book. This shift from traditional to tradigital to social media is illustrated in Figure 1.5.

        * Boarcast, Print, Radio, Outdoors
        * Traditional Marketing: mass media, push orientation, outbound messaging, attention gained via orientation

        * Display ads, microsites, email, search
        * Tradigital marketing: mass and targeted online media, push orientation, outbound messaging with interactivity enabled

        * Networks, Communities, Blogs, Microblogs
        * Social Media Marketing: Niche online media, attraction orientation (pull), content attracts inbound traffic, attention gained via interactivity, dialogue, participation, sharing

### SOCIAL MEDIA ACHIEVES MARKETING OBJECTIVES
* As social media marketing has accelerated over the last few years, the objectives organizations can accomplish have also expanded. Table 1.2 shows the percentage of marekters using social media marketing to accomplish objectives across a range of marketing activities that include promotion and branding, customer service, relationship management, retailing and commerce, and marketing research.

        Table 1.2: Top Priorities for Business Using Social Media Marketing

        Social Media Marketing Priorities | % Companies Using
        * Brand awareness and brand building | 88.2
        * New product introduction | 64.7
        * New customer acquisition | 60.1
        * Brand promotions (e.g., sales promotoins, contests) | 59.2
        * Customer retention | 55.5
        * Customer service | 40.8
        * Employee engagement | 35.3
        * Market research |33.6
        * Targeting new markets | 25.6
        * Identifying new product opportunity | 17.2

* Just as the digital lives of consumers intersect across the four zones of social media, brands reach consumers in those same spaces to build awareness, promote themselves, and encourage users to try them. Let's take a closer look at some of the ways they do this.

## PROMOTION AND BRANDING
* Marketers have many possible techniques to promote goods, services, ideas, places, or people. Though there are potentially dozens of specific promotion objectives marketers may seek to accomplish, there are two overaching objectives relevant to the use of social media marketing as part of a brand's promotional mix:

1. Extend and leverage the brand's media coverage
2. Influence the consumer throughout the decision-making process.

* When it comes to acquiring space in media to distribute brand messages, **marketers have access to four core types of media: 1) paid, 2) owned, 3) earned, 4) shared.** This is illustrated in the PESO model, shown in Figure 1.6. Marketers are charged monetary fees for **paid media**, including purchasing space to deliver brand messages and securing endorsements. Paid media are traditionally the purview of **advertising**, defined as the paid placement of promotional messages in channels capable of reaching a mass audience. **public relations**, the promotional mix component tasked with generating positive publicity and goodwill, may also utilize paid media in the form of sponsorships. **Television commercials, radio ads, magazine print ads, newspaper ads, billboards, Internet display ads, and search engine marketing (SEM) all represent examples of paid media that may be incorporated in a brand's promotional plan. As we'll see in later chapters, other emerging formats include paying for messages in online games like Happy Pets or offering branded virtual goods to inhabitants of virtual worlds. And traditional sales promotions such as coupons and contests get a new life on social media platforms.

        FIGURE 1.6 PESO Model

        * Earn: Publicity, Media relations, Blogger relations, Investor relations, Influencer relations

        * Shared/Earned: (Influencer engagement), Response to detractors, Detractors turned loyalists, Detractors turned advocates

        * Shared: Facebook (living streaming), Twitter, Linkedin, Youtube, Pinterest, Instagram, Vine, Google

        * Owned: Websites, employer stories, customer stories (case studies), user-generated content, reviews, brand journalism, webinars/videos/podcasts

        * Paid/Owned: Affiliate, Brand ambassador, Sponsor content, native advertising (advertorial), Expert content

        * Paid: Facebook-sponsored posts, Sponsored tweets, Twitter cards, lead generation, TV & Other advertising, Direct marketing, Sales promotion

        * Paid/Earned/Shared/Owned: Optimized content, shared content, engaged content


page 24